the adventure of the empty house qzmSEPqzm. 
   it was in the spring of the year  qzmNUMqzm  that all london was interested  and the fashionable world dismayed  by the murder of the honourable ronald adair under most unusual and inexplicable circumstances qzmSEPqzm. 
 the public has already learned those particulars of the crime which came out in the police investigation  but a good deal was suppressed upon that occasion  since the case for the prosecution was so overwhelmingly strong that it was not necessary to bring forward all the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 only now  at the end of nearly ten years  am i allowed to supply those missing links which make up the whole of that remarkable chain qzmSEPqzm. 
 the crime was of interest in itself  but that interest was as nothing to me compared to the inconceivable sequel  which afforded me the greatest shock and surprise of any event in my adventurous life qzmSEPqzm. 
 even now  after this long interval  i find myself thrilling as i think of it  and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy  amazement  and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 let me say to that public which has shown some interest in those glimpses which i have occasionally given them of the thoughts and actions of a very remarkable man that they are not to blame me if i have not shared my knowledge with them  for i should have considered it my first duty to have done so had i not been barred by a positive prohibition from his own lips  which was only withdrawn upon the third of last month qzmSEPqzm. 
  it can be imagined that my close intimacy with sherlock holmes had interested me deeply in crime  and that after his disappearance i never failed to read with care the various problems which came before the public  and i even attempted more than once for my own private satisfaction to employ his methods in their solution  though with indifferent success qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was none  however  which appealed to me like this tragedy of ronald adair qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i read the evidence at the inquest  which led up to a verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons unknown  i realized more clearly than i had ever done the loss which the community had sustained by the death of sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were points about this strange business which would  i was sure  have specially appealed to him  and the efforts of the police would have been supplemented  or more probably anticipated  by the trained observation and the alert mind of the first criminal agent in europe qzmSEPqzm. 
 all day as i drove upon my round i turned over the case in my mind  and found no explanation which appeared to me to be adequate qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the risk of telling a twicetold tale i will recapitulate the facts as they were known to the public at the conclusion of the inquest qzmSEPqzm. 
  the honourable ronald adair was the second son of the earl of maynooth  at that time governor of one of the australian colonies qzmSEPqzm. 
 adairs mother had returned from australia to undergo the operation for cataract  and she  her son ronald  and her daughter hilda were living together at  qzmNUMqzm   park lane qzmSEPqzm. 
 the youth moved in the best society  had  so far as was known  no enemies  and no particular vices qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had been engaged to miss edith woodley  of carstairs  but the engagement had been broken off by mutual consent some months before  and there was no sign that it had left any very profound feeling behind it qzmSEPqzm. 
 for the rest the mans life moved in a narrow and conventional circle  for his habits were quiet and his nature unemotional qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet it was upon this easygoing young aristocrat that death came in most strange and unexpected form between the hours of ten and eleventwenty on the night of march  qzmNUMqzm    qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
  ronald adair was fond of cards  playing continually  but never for such stakes as would hurt him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a member of the baldwin  the cavendish  and the bagatelle card clubs qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was shown that after dinner on the day of his death he had played a rubber of whist at the latter club qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had also played there in the afternoon qzmSEPqzm. 
 the evidence of those who had played with himmr qzmSEPqzm. 
 murray  sir john hardy  and colonel moranshowed that the game was whist  and that there was a fairly equal fall of the cards qzmSEPqzm. 
 adair might have lost five pounds  but not more qzmSEPqzm. 
 his fortune was a considerable one  and such a loss could not in any way affect him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had played nearly every day at one club or other  but he was a cautious player  and usually rose a winner qzmSEPqzm. 
 it came out in evidence that in partnership with colonel moran he had actually won as much as four hundred and twenty pounds in a sitting some weeks before from godfrey milner and lord balmoral qzmSEPqzm. 
 so much for his recent history  as it came out at the inquest qzmSEPqzm. 
  on the evening of the crime he returned from the club exactly at ten qzmSEPqzm. 
 his mother and sister were out spending the evening with a relation qzmSEPqzm. 
 the servant deposed that she heard him enter the front room on the second floor  generally used as his sittingroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had lit a fire there  and as it smoked she had opened the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 no sound was heard from the room until eleventwenty  the hour of the return of lady maynooth and her daughter qzmSEPqzm. 
 desiring to say goodnight  she had attempted to enter her sons room qzmSEPqzm. 
 the door was locked on the inside  and no answer could be got to their cries and knocking qzmSEPqzm. 
 help was obtained and the door forced qzmSEPqzm. 
 the unfortunate young man was found lying near the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 his head had been horribly mutilated by an expanding revolver bullet  but no weapon of any sort was to be found in the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the table lay two banknotes for ten pounds each and seventeen pounds ten in silver and gold  the money arranged in little piles of varying amount qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were some figures also upon a sheet of paper with the names of some club friends opposite to them  from which it was conjectured that before his death he was endeavouring to make out his losses or winnings at cards qzmSEPqzm. 
  a minute examination of the circumstances served only to make the case more complex qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the first place  no reason could be given why the young man should have fastened the door upon the inside qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was the possibility that the murderer had done this and had afterwards escaped by the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 the drop was at least twenty feet  however  and a bed of crocuses in full bloom lay beneath qzmSEPqzm. 
 neither the flowers nor the earth showed any sign of having been disturbed  nor were there any marks upon the narrow strip of grass which separated the house from the road qzmSEPqzm. 
 apparently  therefore  it was the young man himself who had fastened the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 but how did he come by his death no one could have climbed up to the window without leaving traces qzmSEPqzm. 
 suppose a man had fired through the window  it would indeed be a remarkable shot who could with a revolver inflict so deadly a wound qzmSEPqzm. 
 again  park lane is a frequented thoroughfare  and there is a cabstand within a hundred yards of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one had heard a shot qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet there was the dead man  and there the revolver bullet  which had mushroomed out  as softnosed bullets will  and so inflicted a wound which must have caused instantaneous death qzmSEPqzm. 
 such were the circumstances of the park lane mystery  which were further complicated by entire absence of motive  since  as i have said  young adair was not known to have any enemy  and no attempt had been made to remove the money or valuables in the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  all day i turned these facts over in my mind  endeavouring to hit upon some theory which could reconcile them all  and to find that line of least resistance which my poor friend had declared to be the startingpoint of every investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess that i made little progress qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the evening i strolled across the park  and found myself about six oclock at the oxford street end of park lane qzmSEPqzm. 
 a group of loafers upon the pavements  all staring up at a particular window  directed me to the house which i had come to see qzmSEPqzm. 
 a tall  thin man with coloured glasses  whom i strongly suspected of being a plainclothes detective  was pointing out some theory of his own  while the others crowded round to listen to what he said qzmSEPqzm. 
 i got as near him as i could  but his observations seemed to me to be absurd  so i withdrew again in some disgust qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i did so i struck against an elderly deformed man  who had been behind me  and i knocked down several books which he was carrying qzmSEPqzm. 
 i remember that as i picked them up i observed the title of one of them  the origin of tree worship  and it struck me that the fellow must be some poor bibliophile who  either as a trade or as a hobby  was a collector of obscure volumes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i endeavoured to apologize for the accident  but it was evident that these books which i had so unfortunately maltreated were very precious objects in the eyes of their owner qzmSEPqzm. 
 with a snarl of contempt he turned upon his heel  and i saw his curved back and white sidewhiskers disappear among the throng qzmSEPqzm. 
  my observations of no qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm   park lane did little to clear up the problem in which i was interested qzmSEPqzm. 
 the house was separated from the street by a low wall and railing  the whole not more than five feet high qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was perfectly easy  therefore  for anyone to get into the garden  but the window was entirely inaccessible  since there was no waterpipe or anything which could help the most active man to climb it qzmSEPqzm. 
 more puzzled than ever i retraced my steps to kensington qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had not been in my study five minutes when the maid entered to say that a person desired to see me qzmSEPqzm. 
 to my astonishment it was none other than my strange old bookcollector  his sharp  wizened face peering out from a frame of white hair  and his precious volumes  a dozen of them at least  wedged under his right arm qzmSEPqzm. 
  youre surprised to see me  sir  said he  in a strange  croaking voice qzmSEPqzm. 
  i acknowledged that i was qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  ive a conscience  sir  and when i chanced to see you go into this house  as i came hobbling after you  i thought to myself  ill just step in and see that kind gentleman  and tell him that if i was a bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm meant  and that i am much obliged to him for picking up my books qzmSEPqzm. 
  you make too much of a trifle  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 may i ask how you knew who i was  well  sir  if it isnt too great a liberty  i am a neighbour of yours  for youll find my little bookshop at the corner of church street  and very happy to see you  i am sure qzmSEPqzm. 
 maybe you collect yourself  sir  heres british birds  and catullus  and the holy wara bargain every one of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 with five volumes you could just fill that gap on that second shelf qzmSEPqzm. 
 it looks untidy  does it not  sir  i moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i turned again sherlock holmes was standing smiling at me across my study table qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rose to my feet  stared at him for some seconds in utter amazement  and then it appears that i must have fainted for the first and the last time in my life qzmSEPqzm. 
 certainly a grey mist swirled before my eyes  and when it cleared i found my collarends undone and the tingling aftertaste of brandy upon my lips qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was bending over my chair  his flask in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  my dear watson  said the wellremembered voice  i owe you a thousand apologies qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had no idea that you would be so affected qzmSEPqzm. 
  i gripped him by the arm qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 is it really you can it indeed be that you are alive is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out of that awful abyss  wait a moment  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 are you sure that you are really fit to discuss things i have given you a serious shock by my unnecessarily dramatic reappearance qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am all right  but indeed  holmes  i can hardly believe my eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 good heavens  to think that youyou of all menshould be standing in my study again i gripped him by the sleeve and felt the thin  sinewy arm beneath it qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  youre not a spirit  anyhow  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 my dear chap  i am overjoyed to see you qzmSEPqzm. 
 sit down and tell me how you came alive out of that dreadful chasm qzmSEPqzm. 
  he sat opposite to me and lit a cigarette in his old nonchalant manner qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was dressed in the seedy frockcoat of the book merchant  but the rest of that individual lay in a pile of white hair and old books upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes looked even thinner and keener than of old  but there was a deadwhite tinge in his aquiline face which told me that his life recently had not been a healthy one qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am glad to stretch myself  watson  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is no joke when a tall man has to take a foot off his stature for several hours on end qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  my dear fellow  in the matter of these explanations we have  if i may ask for your cooperation  a hard and dangerous nights work in front of us qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps it would be better if i gave you an account of the whole situation when that work is finished qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am full of curiosity qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should much prefer to hear now qzmSEPqzm. 
  youll come with me tonight  when you like and where you like qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is indeed like the old days qzmSEPqzm. 
 we shall have time for a mouthful of dinner before we need go qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  then  about that chasm qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had no serious difficulty in getting out of it  for the very simple reason that i never was in it qzmSEPqzm. 
  you never were in it  no  watson  i never was in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 my note to you was absolutely genuine qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had little doubt that i had come to the end of my career when i perceived the somewhat sinister figure of the late professor moriarty standing upon the narrow pathway which led to safety qzmSEPqzm. 
 i read an inexorable purpose in his grey eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i exchanged some remarks with him  therefore  and obtained his courteous permission to write the short note which you afterwards received qzmSEPqzm. 
 i left it with my cigarettebox and my stick and i walked along the pathway  moriarty still at my heels qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i reached the end i stood at bay qzmSEPqzm. 
 he drew no weapon  but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he knew that his own game was up  and was only anxious to revenge himself upon me qzmSEPqzm. 
 we tottered together upon the brink of the fall qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have some knowledge  however  of baritsu  or the japanese system of wrestling  which has more than once been very useful to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i slipped through his grip  and he with a horrible scream kicked madly for a few seconds and clawed the air with both his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 but for all his efforts he could not get his balance  and over he went qzmSEPqzm. 
 with my face over the brink i saw him fall for a long way qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he struck a rock  bounded off  and splashed into the water qzmSEPqzm. 
  i listened with amazement to this explanation  which holmes delivered between the puffs of his cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the tracks i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw with my own eyes that two went down the path and none returned qzmSEPqzm. 
  it came about in this way qzmSEPqzm. 
 the instant that the professor had disappeared it struck me what a really extraordinarily lucky chance fate had placed in my way qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew that moriarty was not the only man who had sworn my death qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were at least three others whose desire for vengeance upon me would only be increased by the death of their leader qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were all most dangerous men qzmSEPqzm. 
 one or other would certainly get me qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other hand  if all the world was convinced that i was dead they would take liberties  these men  they would lay themselves open  and sooner or later i could destroy them qzmSEPqzm. 
 then it would be time for me to announce that i was still in the land of the living qzmSEPqzm. 
 so rapidly does the brain act that i believe i had thought this all out before professor moriarty had reached the bottom of the reichenbach fall qzmSEPqzm. 
  i stood up and examined the rocky wall behind me qzmSEPqzm. 
 in your picturesque account of the matter  which i read with great interest some months later  you assert that the wall was sheer qzmSEPqzm. 
 this was not literally true qzmSEPqzm. 
 a few small footholds presented themselves  and there was some indication of a ledge qzmSEPqzm. 
 the cliff is so high that to climb it all was an obvious impossibility  and it was equally impossible to make my way along the wet path without leaving some tracks qzmSEPqzm. 
 i might  it is true  have reversed my boots  as i have done on similar occasions  but the sight of three sets of tracks in one direction would certainly have suggested a deception qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the whole  then  it was best that i should risk the climb qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was not a pleasant business  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fall roared beneath me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am not a fanciful person  but i give you my word that i seemed to hear moriartys voice screaming at me out of the abyss qzmSEPqzm. 
 a mistake would have been fatal qzmSEPqzm. 
 more than once  as tufts of grass came out in my hand or my foot slipped in the wet notches of the rock  i thought that i was gone qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i struggled upwards  and at last i reached a ledge several feet deep and covered with soft green moss  where i could lie unseen in the most perfect comfort qzmSEPqzm. 
 there i was stretched when you  my dear watson  and all your following were investigating in the most sympathetic and inefficient manner the circumstances of my death qzmSEPqzm. 
  at last  when you had all formed your inevitable and totally erroneous conclusions  you departed for the hotel and i was left alone qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had imagined that i had reached the end of my adventures  but a very unexpected occurrence showed me that there were surprises still in store for me qzmSEPqzm. 
 a huge rock  falling from above  boomed past me  struck the path  and bounded over into the chasm qzmSEPqzm. 
 for an instant i thought that it was an accident  but a moment later  looking up  i saw a mans head against the darkening sky  and another stone struck the very ledge upon which i was stretched  within a foot of my head qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  the meaning of this was obvious qzmSEPqzm. 
 moriarty had not been alone qzmSEPqzm. 
 a confederateand even that one glance had told me how dangerous a man that confederate washad kept guard while the professor had attacked me qzmSEPqzm. 
 from a distance  unseen by me  he had been a witness of his friends death and of my escape qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had waited  and then  making his way round to the top of the cliff  he had endeavoured to succeed where his comrade had failed qzmSEPqzm. 
  i did not take long to think about it  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 again i saw that grim face look over the cliff  and i knew that it was the precursor of another stone qzmSEPqzm. 
 i scrambled down on to the path qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont think i could have done it in cold blood qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a hundred times more difficult than getting up qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i had no time to think of the danger  for another stone sang past me as i hung by my hands from the edge of the ledge qzmSEPqzm. 
 halfway down i slipped  but by the blessing of god i landed  torn and bleeding  upon the path qzmSEPqzm. 
 i took to my heels  did ten miles over the mountains in the darkness  and a week later i found myself in florence with the certainty that no one in the world knew what had become of me qzmSEPqzm. 
  i had only one confidantmy brother mycroft qzmSEPqzm. 
 i owe you many apologies  my dear watson  but it was allimportant that it should be thought i was dead  and it is quite certain that you would not have written so convincing an account of my unhappy end had you not yourself thought that it was true qzmSEPqzm. 
 several times during the last three years i have taken up my pen to write to you  but always i feared lest your affectionate regard for me should tempt you to some indiscretion which would betray my secret qzmSEPqzm. 
 for that reason i turned away from you this evening when you upset my books  for i was in danger at the time  and any show of surprise and emotion upon your part might have drawn attention to my identity and led to the most deplorable and irreparable results qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to mycroft  i had to confide in him in order to obtain the money which i needed qzmSEPqzm. 
 the course of events in london did not run so well as i had hoped  for the trial of the moriarty gang left two of its most dangerous members  my own most vindictive enemies  at liberty qzmSEPqzm. 
 i travelled for two years in tibet  therefore  and amused myself by visiting lhassa and spending some days with the head llama qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may have read of the remarkable explorations of a norwegian named sigerson  but i am sure that it never occurred to you that you were receiving news of your friend qzmSEPqzm. 
 i then passed through persia  looked in at mecca  and paid a short but interesting visit to the khalifa at khartoum  the results of which i have communicated to the foreign office qzmSEPqzm. 
 returning to france i spent some months in a research into the coaltar derivatives  which i conducted in a laboratory at montpelier  in the south of france qzmSEPqzm. 
 having concluded this to my satisfaction  and learning that only one of my enemies was now left in london  i was about to return when my movements were hastened by the news of this very remarkable park lane mystery  which not only appealed to me by its own merits  but which seemed to offer some most peculiar personal opportunities qzmSEPqzm. 
 i came over at once to london  called in my own person at baker street  threw mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson into violent hysterics  and found that mycroft had preserved my rooms and my papers exactly as they had always been qzmSEPqzm. 
 so it was  my dear watson  that at two oclock today i found myself in my old armchair in my own old room  and only wishing that i could have seen my old friend watson in the other chair which he has so often adorned qzmSEPqzm. 
  such was the remarkable narrative to which i listened on that april eveninga narrative which would have been utterly incredible to me had it not been confirmed by the actual sight of the tall  spare figure and the keen  eager face  which i had never thought to see again qzmSEPqzm. 
 in some manner he had learned of my own sad bereavement  and his sympathy was shown in his manner rather than in his words qzmSEPqzm. 
 work is the best antidote to sorrow  my dear watson  said he  and i have a piece of work for us both tonight which  if we can bring it to a successful conclusion  will in itself justify a mans life on this planet qzmSEPqzm. 
 in vain i begged him to tell me more qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will hear and see enough before morning  he answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have three years of the past to discuss qzmSEPqzm. 
 let that suffice until halfpast nine  when we start upon the notable adventure of the empty house qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was indeed like old times when  at that hour  i found myself seated beside him in a hansom  my revolver in my pocket and the thrill of adventure in my heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was cold and stern and silent qzmSEPqzm. 
 as the gleam of the streetlamps flashed upon his austere features i saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and his thin lips compressed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew not what wild beast we were about to hunt down in the dark jungle of criminal london  but i was well assured from the bearing of this master huntsman that the adventure was a most grave one  while the sardonic smile which occasionally broke through his ascetic gloom boded little good for the object of our quest qzmSEPqzm. 
  i had imagined that we were bound for baker street  but holmes stopped the cab at the corner of cavendish square qzmSEPqzm. 
 i observed that as he stepped out he gave a most searching glance to right and left  and at every subsequent street corner he took the utmost pains to assure that he was not followed qzmSEPqzm. 
 our route was certainly a singular one qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmess knowledge of the byways of london was extraordinary  and on this occasion he passed rapidly  and with an assured step  through a network of mews and stables the very existence of which i had never known qzmSEPqzm. 
 we emerged at last into a small road  lined with old  gloomy houses  which led us into manchester street  and so to blandford street qzmSEPqzm. 
 here he turned swiftly down a narrow passage  passed through a wooden gate into a deserted yard  and then opened with a key the back door of a house qzmSEPqzm. 
 we entered together and he closed it behind us qzmSEPqzm. 
  the place was pitchdark  but it was evident to me that it was an empty house qzmSEPqzm. 
 our feet creaked and crackled over the bare planking  and my outstretched hand touched a wall from which the paper was hanging in ribbons qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmess cold  thin fingers closed round my wrist and led me forwards down a long hall  until i dimly saw the murky fanlight over the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 here holmes turned suddenly to the right  and we found ourselves in a large  square  empty room  heavily shadowed in the corners  but faintly lit in the centre from the lights of the street beyond qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no lamp near and the window was thick with dust  so that we could only just discern each others figures within qzmSEPqzm. 
 my companion put his hand upon my shoulder and his lips close to my ear qzmSEPqzm. 
  do you know where we are he whispered qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely that is baker street  i answered  staring through the dim window qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 we are in camden house  which stands opposite to our own old quarters qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why are we here  because it commands so excellent a view of that picturesque pile qzmSEPqzm. 
 might i trouble you  my dear watson  to draw a little nearer to the window  taking every precaution not to show yourself  and then to look up at our old roomsthe startingpoint of so many of our little adventures we will see if my three years of absence have entirely taken away my power to surprise you qzmSEPqzm. 
  i crept forward and looked across at the familiar window qzmSEPqzm. 
 as my eyes fell upon it i gave a gasp and a cry of amazement qzmSEPqzm. 
 the blind was down and a strong light was burning in the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 the shadow of a man who was seated in a chair within was thrown in hard  black outline upon the luminous screen of the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no mistaking the poise of the head  the squareness of the shoulders  the sharpness of the features qzmSEPqzm. 
 the face was turned halfround  and the effect was that of one of those black silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a perfect reproduction of holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 so amazed was i that i threw out my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was quivering with silent laughter qzmSEPqzm. 
  well said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  good heavens i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is marvellous qzmSEPqzm. 
  i trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinite variety  said he  and i recognised in his voice the joy and pride which the artist takes in his own creation qzmSEPqzm. 
 it really is rather like me  is it not  i should be prepared to swear that it was you qzmSEPqzm. 
  the credit of the execution is due to monsieur oscar meunier  of grenoble  who spent some days in doing the moulding qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a bust in wax qzmSEPqzm. 
 the rest i arranged myself during my visit to baker street this afternoon qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why  because  my dear watson  i had the strongest possible reason for wishing certain people to think that i was there when i was really elsewhere qzmSEPqzm. 
  and you thought the rooms were watched  i knew that they were watched qzmSEPqzm. 
  by whom  by my old enemies  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the charming society whose leader lies in the reichenbach fall qzmSEPqzm. 
 you must remember that they knew  and only they knew  that i was still alive qzmSEPqzm. 
 sooner or later they believed that i should come back to my rooms qzmSEPqzm. 
 they watched them continuously  and this morning they saw me arrive qzmSEPqzm. 
  how do you know  because i recognised their sentinel when i glanced out of my window qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a harmless enough fellow  parker by name  a garroter by trade  and a remarkable performer upon the jews harp qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cared nothing for him qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i cared a great deal for the much more formidable person who was behind him  the bosom friend of moriarty  the man who dropped the rocks over the cliff  the most cunning and dangerous criminal in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is the man who is after me tonight  watson  and that is the man who is quite unaware that we are after him qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friends plans were gradually revealing themselves qzmSEPqzm. 
 from this convenient retreat the watchers were being watched and the trackers tracked qzmSEPqzm. 
 that angular shadow up yonder was the bait and we were the hunters qzmSEPqzm. 
 in silence we stood together in the darkness and watched the hurrying figures who passed and repassed in front of us qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was silent and motionless  but i could tell that he was keenly alert  and that his eyes were fixed intently upon the stream of passersby qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a bleak and boisterous night  and the wind whistled shrilly down the long street qzmSEPqzm. 
 many people were moving to and fro  most of them muffled in their coats and cravats qzmSEPqzm. 
 once or twice it seemed to me that i had seen the same figure before  and i especially noticed two men who appeared to be sheltering themselves from the wind in the doorway of a house some distance up the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tried to draw my companions attention to them  but he gave a little ejaculation of impatience and continued to stare into the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 more than once he fidgeted with his feet and tapped rapidly with his fingers upon the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident to me that he was becoming uneasy and that his plans were not working out altogether as he had hoped qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last  as midnight approached and the street gradually cleared  he paced up and down the room in uncontrollable agitation qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was about to make some remark to him when i raised my eyes to the lighted window and again experienced almost as great a surprise as before qzmSEPqzm. 
 i clutched holmess arm and pointed upwards qzmSEPqzm. 
  the shadow has moved i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was  indeed  no longer the profile  but the back  which was turned towards us qzmSEPqzm. 
  three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his temper or his impatience with a less active intelligence than his own qzmSEPqzm. 
  of course it has moved  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 am i such a farcical bungler  watson  that i should erect an obvious dummy and expect that some of the sharpest men in europe would be deceived by it we have been in this room two hours  and mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson has made some change in that figure eight times  or once in every quarter of an hour qzmSEPqzm. 
 she works it from the front so that her shadow may never be seen qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah he drew in his breath with a shrill  excited intake qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the dim light i saw his head thrown forward  his whole attitude rigid with attention qzmSEPqzm. 
 outside  the street was absolutely deserted qzmSEPqzm. 
 those two men might still be crouching in the doorway  but i could no longer see them qzmSEPqzm. 
 all was still and dark  save only that brilliant yellow screen in front of us with the black figure outlined upon its centre qzmSEPqzm. 
 again in the utter silence i heard that thin  sibilant note which spoke of intense suppressed excitement qzmSEPqzm. 
 an instant later he pulled me back into the blackest corner of the room  and i felt his warning hand upon my lips qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fingers which clutched me were quivering qzmSEPqzm. 
 never had i known my friend more moved  and yet the dark street still stretched lonely and motionless before us qzmSEPqzm. 
  but suddenly i was aware of that which his keener senses had already distinguished qzmSEPqzm. 
 a low  stealthy sound came to my ears  not from the direction of baker street  but from the back of the very house in which we lay concealed qzmSEPqzm. 
 a door opened and shut qzmSEPqzm. 
 an instant later steps crept down the passagesteps which were meant to be silent  but which reverberated harshly through the empty house qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes crouched back against the wall and i did the same  my hand closing upon the handle of my revolver qzmSEPqzm. 
 peering through the gloom  i saw the vague outline of a man  a shade blacker than the blackness of the open door qzmSEPqzm. 
 he stood for an instant  and then he crept forward  crouching  menacing  into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was within three yards of us  this sinister figure  and i had braced myself to meet his spring  before i realized that he had no idea of our presence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he passed close beside us  stole over to the window  and very softly and noiselessly raised it for half a foot qzmSEPqzm. 
 as he sank to the level of this opening the light of the street  no longer dimmed by the dusty glass  fell full upon his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man seemed to be beside himself with excitement qzmSEPqzm. 
 his two eyes shone like stars and his features were working convulsively qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was an elderly man  with a thin  projecting nose  a high  bald forehead  and a huge grizzled moustache qzmSEPqzm. 
 an operahat was pushed to the back of his head  and an evening dress shirtfront gleamed out through his open overcoat qzmSEPqzm. 
 his face was gaunt and swarthy  scored with deep  savage lines qzmSEPqzm. 
 in his hand he carried what appeared to be a stick  but as he laid it down upon the floor it gave a metallic clang qzmSEPqzm. 
 then from the pocket of his overcoat he drew a bulky object  and he busied himself in some task which ended with a loud  sharp click  as if a spring or bolt had fallen into its place qzmSEPqzm. 
 still kneeling upon the floor he bent forward and threw all his weight and strength upon some lever  with the result that there came a long  whirling  grinding noise  ending once more in a powerful click qzmSEPqzm. 
 he straightened himself then  and i saw that what he held in his hand was a sort of gun  with a curiously misshapen butt qzmSEPqzm. 
 he opened it at the breech  put something in  and snapped the breechblock qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  crouching down  he rested the end of the barrel upon the ledge of the open window  and i saw his long moustache droop over the stock and his eye gleam as it peered along the sights qzmSEPqzm. 
 i heard a little sigh of satisfaction as he cuddled the butt into his shoulder  and saw that amazing target  the black man on the yellow ground  standing clear at the end of his fore sight qzmSEPqzm. 
 for an instant he was rigid and motionless qzmSEPqzm. 
 then his finger tightened on the trigger qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a strange  loud whiz and a long  silvery tinkle of broken glass qzmSEPqzm. 
 at that instant holmes sprang like a tiger on to the marksmans back and hurled him flat upon his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was up again in a moment  and with convulsive strength he seized holmes by the throat  but i struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver and he dropped again upon the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fell upon him  and as i held him my comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was the clatter of running feet upon the pavement  and two policemen in uniform  with one plainclothes detective  rushed through the front entrance and into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  that you  lestrade said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i took the job myself qzmSEPqzm. 
 its good to see you back in london  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think you want a little unofficial help qzmSEPqzm. 
 three undetected murders in one year wont do  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 but you handled the molesey mystery with less than your usualthats to say  you handled it fairly well qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had all risen to our feet  our prisoner breathing hard  with a stalwart constable on each side of him qzmSEPqzm. 
 already a few loiterers had begun to collect in the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes stepped up to the window  closed it  and dropped the blinds qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade had produced two candles and the policemen had uncovered their lanterns qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was able at last to have a good look at our prisoner qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was turned towards us qzmSEPqzm. 
 with the brow of a philosopher above and the jaw of a sensualist below  the man must have started with great capacities for good or for evil qzmSEPqzm. 
 but one could not look upon his cruel blue eyes  with their drooping  cynical lids  or upon the fierce  aggressive nose and the threatening  deeplined brow  without reading natures plainest dangersignals qzmSEPqzm. 
 he took no heed of any of us  but his eyes were fixed upon holmess face with an expression in which hatred and amazement were equally blended qzmSEPqzm. 
 you fiend he kept on muttering qzmSEPqzm. 
 you clever  clever fiend  ah  colonel said holmes  arranging his rumpled collar  journeys end in lovers meetings  as the old play says qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont think i have had the pleasure of seeing you since you favoured me with those attentions as i lay on the ledge above the reichenbach fall qzmSEPqzm. 
  the colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance qzmSEPqzm. 
 you cunning  cunning fiend was all that he could say qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have not introduced you yet  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 this  gentlemen  is colonel sebastian moran  once of her majestys indian army  and the best heavy game shot that our eastern empire has ever produced qzmSEPqzm. 
 i believe i am correct  colonel  in saying that your bag of tigers still remains unrivalled  the fierce old man said nothing  but still glared at my companion  with his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully like a tiger himself qzmSEPqzm. 
  i wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a shikari   said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must be very familiar to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you not tethered a young kid under a tree  lain above it with your rifle  and waited for the bait to bring up your tiger this empty house is my tree and you are my tiger qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have possibly had other guns in reserve in case there should be several tigers  or in the unlikely supposition of your own aim failing you qzmSEPqzm. 
 these  he pointed around  are my other guns qzmSEPqzm. 
 the parallel is exact qzmSEPqzm. 
  colonel moran sprang forward  with a snarl of rage  but the constables dragged him back qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fury upon his face was terrible to look at qzmSEPqzm. 
  i confess that you had one small surprise for me  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i did not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this empty house and this convenient front window qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had imagined you as operating from the street  where my friend lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you qzmSEPqzm. 
 with that exception all has gone as i expected qzmSEPqzm. 
  colonel moran turned to the official detective qzmSEPqzm. 
  you may or may not have just cause for arresting me  said he  but at least there can be no reason why i should submit to the gibes of this person qzmSEPqzm. 
 if i am in the hands of the law let things be done in a legal way qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  thats reasonable enough  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing further you have to say  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  before we go  holmes had picked up the powerful airgun from the floor and was examining its mechanism qzmSEPqzm. 
  an admirable and unique weapon  said he  noiseless and of tremendous power qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew von herder  the blind german mechanic  who constructed it to the order of the late professor moriarty qzmSEPqzm. 
 for years i have been aware of its existence  though i have never before had the opportunity of handling it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i commend it very specially to your attention  lestrade  and also the bullets which fit it qzmSEPqzm. 
  you can trust us to look after that  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said lestrade  as the whole party moved towards the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 anything further to say  only to ask what charge you intend to prefer  what charge  sir why  of course  the attempted murder of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  not so  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 i do not propose to appear in the matter at all qzmSEPqzm. 
 to you  and to you only  belongs the credit of the remarkable arrest which you have effected qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  lestrade  i congratulate you with your usual happy mixture of cunning and audacity you have got him qzmSEPqzm. 
  got him got whom  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  the man that the whole force has been seeking in vaincolonel sebastian moran  who shot the honourable ronald adair with an expanding bullet from an airgun through the open window of the secondfloor front of no qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm   park lane  upon the  qzmNUMqzm th of last month qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats the charge  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  watson  if you can endure the draught from a broken window  i think that half an hour in my study over a cigar may afford you some profitable amusement qzmSEPqzm. 
   our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision of mycroft holmes and the immediate care of mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i entered i saw  it is true  an unwonted tidiness  but the old landmarks were all in their place qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were the chemical corner and the acidstained  dealtopped table qzmSEPqzm. 
 there upon a shelf was the row of formidable scrapbooks and books of reference which many of our fellowcitizens would have been so glad to burn qzmSEPqzm. 
 the diagrams  the violincase  and the piperackeven the persian slipper which contained the tobaccoall met my eyes as i glanced round me qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were two occupants of the roomone mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson  who beamed upon us both as we entered  the other the strange dummy which had played so important a part in the evenings adventures qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a waxcoloured model of my friend  so admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile qzmSEPqzm. 
 it stood on a small pedestal table with an old dressinggown of holmess so draped round it that the illusion from the street was absolutely perfect qzmSEPqzm. 
  i hope you preserved all precautions  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  i went to it on my knees  sir  just as you told me qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent qzmSEPqzm. 
 you carried the thing out very well qzmSEPqzm. 
 did you observe where the bullet went  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 im afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust  for it passed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 i picked it up from the carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is  holmes held it out to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 a soft revolver bullet  as you perceive  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres genius in that  for who would expect to find such a thing fired from an airgun qzmSEPqzm. 
 all right  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson  i am much obliged for your assistance qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  watson  let me see you in your old seat once more  for there are several points which i should like to discuss with you qzmSEPqzm. 
  he had thrown off the seedy frockcoat  and now he was the holmes of old in the mousecoloured dressinggown which he took from his effigy qzmSEPqzm. 
  the old shikaris nerves have not lost their steadiness nor his eyes their keenness  said he  with a laugh  as he inspected the shattered forehead of his bust qzmSEPqzm. 
  plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through the brain qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was the best shot in india  and i expect that there are few better in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you heard the name  no  i have not qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  such is fame but  then  if i remember aright  you had not heard the name of professor james moriarty  who had one of the great brains of the century qzmSEPqzm. 
 just give me down my index of biographies from the shelf qzmSEPqzm. 
  he turned over the pages lazily  leaning back in his chair and blowing great clouds from his cigar qzmSEPqzm. 
  my collection of ms is a fine one  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 moriarty himself is enough to make any letter illustrious  and here is morgan the poisoner  and merridew of abominable memory  and mathews  who knocked out my left canine in the waitingroom at charing cross  and  finally  here is our friend of tonight qzmSEPqzm. 
  he handed over the book  and i read moran  sebastian  colonel qzmSEPqzm. 
 unemployed qzmSEPqzm. 
 formerly  qzmNUMqzm st bengalore pioneers qzmSEPqzm. 
 born london   qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 son of sir augustus moran  c qzmSEPqzm. 
b qzmSEPqzm. 
  once british minister to persia qzmSEPqzm. 
 educated eton and oxford qzmSEPqzm. 
 served in jowaki campaign  afghan campaign  charasiab despatches  sherpur  and cabul qzmSEPqzm. 
 author of heavy game of the western himalayas   qzmNUMqzm   three months in the jungle   qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 address conduit street qzmSEPqzm. 
 clubs the angloindian  the tankerville  the bagatelle card club qzmSEPqzm. 
  on the margin was written  in holmess precise hand the second most dangerous man in london qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is astonishing  said i  as i handed back the volume qzmSEPqzm. 
 the mans career is that of an honourable soldier qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is true  holmes answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 up to a certain point he did well qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was always a man of iron nerve  and the story is still told in india how he crawled down a drain after a wounded maneating tiger qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are some trees  watson  which grow to a certain height and then suddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will see it often in humans qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have a theory that the individual represents in his development the whole procession of his ancestors  and that such a sudden turn to good or evil stands for some strong influence which came into the line of his pedigree qzmSEPqzm. 
 the person becomes  as it were  the epitome of the history of his own family qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is surely rather fanciful qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i dont insist upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
 whatever the cause  colonel moran began to go wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 without any open scandal  he still made india too hot to hold him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he retired  came to london  and again acquired an evil name qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was at this time that he was sought out by professor moriarty  to whom for a time he was chief of the staff qzmSEPqzm. 
 moriarty supplied him liberally with money and used him only in one or two very highclass jobs which no ordinary criminal could have undertaken qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may have some recollection of the death of mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 stewart  of lauder  in  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 not well  i am sure moran was at the bottom of it  but nothing could be proved qzmSEPqzm. 
 so cleverly was the colonel concealed that even when the moriarty gang was broken up we could not incriminate him qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember at that date  when i called upon you in your rooms  how i put up the shutters for fear of airguns no doubt you thought me fanciful qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew exactly what i was doing  for i knew of the existence of this remarkable gun  and i knew also that one of the best shots in the world would be behind it qzmSEPqzm. 
 when we were in switzerland he followed us with moriarty  and it was undoubtedly he who gave me that evil five minutes on the reichenbach ledge qzmSEPqzm. 
  you may think that i read the papers with some attention during my sojourn in france  on the lookout for any chance of laying him by the heels qzmSEPqzm. 
 so long as he was free in london my life would really not have been worth living qzmSEPqzm. 
 night and day the shadow would have been over me  and sooner or later his chance must have come qzmSEPqzm. 
 what could i do i could not shoot him at sight  or i should myself be in the dock qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no use appealing to a magistrate qzmSEPqzm. 
 they cannot interfere on the strength of what would appear to them to be a wild suspicion qzmSEPqzm. 
 so i could do nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i watched the criminal news  knowing that sooner or later i should get him qzmSEPqzm. 
 then came the death of this ronald adair qzmSEPqzm. 
 my chance had come at last knowing what i did  was it not certain that colonel moran had done it he had played cards with the lad  he had followed him home from the club  he had shot him through the open window qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was not a doubt of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bullets alone are enough to put his head in a noose qzmSEPqzm. 
 i came over at once qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was seen by the sentinel  who would  i knew  direct the colonels attention to my presence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could not fail to connect my sudden return with his crime and to be terribly alarmed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was sure that he would make an attempt to get me out of the way at once  and would bring round his murderous weapon for that purpose qzmSEPqzm. 
 i left him an excellent mark in the window  and  having warned the police that they might be neededby the way  watson  you spotted their presence in that doorway with unerring accuracyi took up what seemed to me to be a judicious post for observation  never dreaming that he would choose the same spot for his attack qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  my dear watson  does anything remain for me to explain  yes  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have not made it clear what was colonel morans motive in murdering the honourable ronald adair qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah my dear watson  there we come into those realms of conjecture where the most logical mind may be at fault qzmSEPqzm. 
 each may form his own hypothesis upon the present evidence  and yours is as likely to be correct as mine qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have formed one  then  i think that it is not difficult to explain the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 it came out in evidence that colonel moran and young adair had between them won a considerable amount of money qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  moran undoubtedly played foulof that i have long been aware qzmSEPqzm. 
 i believe that on the day of the murder adair had discovered that moran was cheating qzmSEPqzm. 
 very likely he had spoken to him privately  and had threatened to expose him unless he voluntarily resigned his membership of the club and promised not to play cards again qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is unlikely that a youngster like adair would at once make a hideous scandal by exposing a wellknown man so much older than himself qzmSEPqzm. 
 probably he acted as i suggest qzmSEPqzm. 
 the exclusion from his clubs would mean ruin to moran  who lived by his illgotten card gains qzmSEPqzm. 
 he therefore murdered adair  who at the time was endeavouring to work out how much money he should himself return  since he could not profit by his partners foul play qzmSEPqzm. 
 he locked the door lest the ladies should surprise him and insist upon knowing what he was doing with these names and coins qzmSEPqzm. 
 will it pass  i have no doubt that you have hit upon the truth qzmSEPqzm. 
  it will be verified or disproved at the trial qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  come what may  colonel moran will trouble us no more  the famous airgun of von herder will embellish the scotland yard museum  and once again mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes is free to devote his life to examining those interesting little problems which the complex life of london so plentifully presents qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the norwood builder qzmSEPqzm. 
   from the point of view of the criminal expert  said mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  london has become a singularly uninteresting city since the death of the late lamented professor moriarty qzmSEPqzm. 
  i can hardly think that you would find many decent citizens to agree with you  i answered qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  i must not be selfish  said he  with a smile  as he pushed back his chair from the breakfasttable qzmSEPqzm. 
 the community is certainly the gainer  and no one the loser  save the poor outofwork specialist  whose occupation has gone qzmSEPqzm. 
 with that man in the field ones morning paper presented infinite possibilities qzmSEPqzm. 
 often it was only the smallest trace  watson  the faintest indication  and yet it was enough to tell me that the great malignant brain was there  as the gentlest tremors of the edges of the web remind one of the foul spider which lurks in the centre qzmSEPqzm. 
 petty thefts  wanton assaults  purposeless outrageto the man who held the clue all could be worked into one connected whole qzmSEPqzm. 
 to the scientific student of the higher criminal world no capital in europe offered the advantages which london then possessed qzmSEPqzm. 
 but now he shrugged his shoulders in humorous deprecation of the state of things which he had himself done so much to produce qzmSEPqzm. 
  at the time of which i speak holmes had been back for some months  and i  at his request  had sold my practice and returned to share the old quarters in baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 a young doctor  named verner  had purchased my small kensington practice  and given with astonishingly little demur the highest price that i ventured to askan incident which only explained itself some years later when i found that verner was a distant relation of holmess  and that it was my friend who had really found the money qzmSEPqzm. 
  our months of partnership had not been so uneventful as he had stated  for i find  on looking over my notes  that this period includes the case of the papers of expresident murillo  and also the shocking affair of the dutch steamship friesland  which so nearly cost us both our lives qzmSEPqzm. 
 his cold and proud nature was always averse  however  to anything in the shape of public applause  and he bound me in the most stringent terms to say no further word of himself  his methods  or his successesa prohibition which  as i have explained  has only now been removed qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes was leaning back in his chair after his whimsical protest  and was unfolding his morning paper in a leisurely fashion  when our attention was arrested by a tremendous ring at the bell  followed immediately by a hollow drumming sound  as if someone were beating on the outer door with his fist qzmSEPqzm. 
 as it opened there came a tumultuous rush into the hall  rapid feet clattered up the stair  and an instant later a wildeyed and frantic young man  pale  dishevelled  and palpitating  burst into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 he looked from one to the other of us  and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious that some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry qzmSEPqzm. 
  im sorry  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 you mustnt blame me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am nearly mad qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i am the unhappy john hector mcfarlane qzmSEPqzm. 
  he made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both his visit and its manner  but i could see by my companions unresponsive face that it meant no more to him than to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  have a cigarette  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane  said he  pushing his case across qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am sure that with your symptoms my friend dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson here would prescribe a sedative qzmSEPqzm. 
 the weather has been so very warm these last few days qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  if you feel a little more composed  i should be glad if you would sit down in that chair and tell us very slowly and quietly who you are and what it is that you want qzmSEPqzm. 
 you mentioned your name as if i should recognise it  but i assure you that  beyond the obvious facts that you are a bachelor  a solicitor  a freemason  and an asthmatic  i know nothing whatever about you qzmSEPqzm. 
  familiar as i was with my friends methods  it was not difficult for me to follow his deductions  and to observe the untidiness of attire  the sheaf of legal papers  the watchcharm  and the breathing which had prompted them qzmSEPqzm. 
 our client  however  stared in amazement qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  i am all that  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and in addition i am the most unfortunate man at this moment in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 for heavens sake dont abandon me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes if they come to arrest me before i have finished my story  make them give me time so that i may tell you the whole truth qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could go to gaol happy if i knew that you were working for me outside qzmSEPqzm. 
  arrest you said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is really most gratimost interesting qzmSEPqzm. 
 on what charge do you expect to be arrested  upon the charge of murdering mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre  of lower norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
  my companions expressive face showed a sympathy which was not  i am afraid  entirely unmixed with satisfaction qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me  said he  it was only this moment at breakfast that i was saying to my friend  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  that sensational cases had disappeared out of our papers qzmSEPqzm. 
  our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up the daily telegraph  which still lay upon holmess knee qzmSEPqzm. 
  if you had looked at it  sir  you would have seen at a glance what the errand is on which i have come to you this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 i feel as if my name and my misfortune must be in every mans mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 he turned it over to expose the central page qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is  and with your permission i will read it to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 listen to this  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the headlines are mysterious affair at lower norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
 disappearance of a wellknown builder qzmSEPqzm. 
 suspicion of murder and arson qzmSEPqzm. 
 a clue to the criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is the clue which they are already following  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and i know that it leads infallibly to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been followed from london bridge station  and i am sure that they are only waiting for the warrant to arrest me qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will break my mothers heartit will break her heart  he wrung his hands in an agony of apprehension  and swayed backwards and forwards in his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  i looked with interest upon this man  who was accused of being the perpetrator of a crime of violence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was flaxenhaired and handsome in a washedout negative fashion  with frightened blue eyes and a cleanshaven face  with a weak  sensitive mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 his age may have been about twentyseven  his dress and bearing that of a gentleman qzmSEPqzm. 
 from the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle of endorsed papers which proclaimed his profession qzmSEPqzm. 
  we must use what time we have  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  would you have the kindness to take the paper and to read me the paragraph in question  underneath the vigorous headlines which our client had quoted i read the following suggestive narrative   late last night  or early this morning  an incident occurred at lower norwood which points  it is feared  to a serious crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre is a wellknown resident of that suburb  where he has carried on his business as a builder for many years qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 oldacre is a bachelor  fiftytwo years of age  and lives in deep dene house  at the sydenham end of the road of that name qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has had the reputation of being a man of eccentric habits  secretive and retiring qzmSEPqzm. 
 for some years he has practically withdrawn from the business  in which he is said to have amassed considerable wealth qzmSEPqzm. 
 a small timberyard still exists  however  at the back of the house  and last night  about twelve oclock  an alarm was given that one of the stacks was on fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 the engines were soon upon the spot  but the dry wood burned with great fury  and it was impossible to arrest the conflagration until the stack had been entirely consumed qzmSEPqzm. 
 up to this point the incident bore the appearance of an ordinary accident  but fresh indications seem to point to serious crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 surprise was expressed at the absence of the master of the establishment from the scene of the fire  and an inquiry followed  which showed that he had disappeared from the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 an examination of his room revealed that the bed had not been slept in  that a safe which stood in it was open  that a number of important papers were scattered about the room  and  finally  that there were signs of a murderous struggle  slight traces of blood being found within the room  and an oaken walkingstick  which also showed stains of blood upon the handle qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is known that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre had received a late visitor in his bedroom upon that night  and the stick found has been identified as the property of this person  who is a young london solicitor named john hector mcfarlane  junior partner of graham and mcfarlane  of  qzmNUMqzm   gresham buildings  e qzmSEPqzm. 
c qzmSEPqzm. 
 the police believe that they have evidence in their possession which supplies a very convincing motive for the crime  and altogether it cannot be doubted that sensational developments will follow qzmSEPqzm. 
  later qzmSEPqzm. 
it is rumoured as we go to press that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 john hector mcfarlane has actually been arrested on the charge of the murder of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is at least certain that a warrant has been issued qzmSEPqzm. 
 there have been further and sinister developments in the investigation at norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides the signs of a struggle in the room of the unfortunate builder it is now known that the french windows of his bedroom which is on the ground floor were found to be open  that there were marks as if some bulky object had been dragged across to the woodpile  and  finally  it is asserted that charred remains have been found among the charcoal ashes of the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 the police theory is that a most sensational crime has been committed  that the victim was clubbed to death in his own bedroom  his papers rifled  and his dead body dragged across to the woodstack  which was then ignited so as to hide all traces of the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 the conduct of the criminal investigation has been left in the experienced hands of inspector lestrade  of scotland yard  who is following up the clues with his accustomed energy and sagacity qzmSEPqzm. 
   sherlock holmes listened with closed eyes and fingertips together to this remarkable account qzmSEPqzm. 
  the case has certainly some points of interest  said he  in his languid fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
 may i ask  in the first place  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane  how it is that you are still at liberty  since there appears to be enough evidence to justify your arrest  i live at torrington lodge  blackheath  with my parents  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  but last night  having to do business very late with mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre  i stayed at an hotel in norwood  and came to my business from there qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew nothing of this affair until i was in the train  when i read what you have just heard qzmSEPqzm. 
 i at once saw the horrible danger of my position  and i hurried to put the case into your hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have no doubt that i should have been arrested either at my city office or at my home qzmSEPqzm. 
 a man followed me from london bridge station  and i have no doubtgreat heaven  what is that  it was a clang of the bell  followed instantly by heavy steps upon the stair qzmSEPqzm. 
 a moment later our old friend lestrade appeared in the doorway qzmSEPqzm. 
 over his shoulder i caught a glimpse of one or two uniformed policemen outside qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 john hector mcfarlane said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  our unfortunate client rose with a ghastly face qzmSEPqzm. 
  i arrest you for the wilful murder of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre  of lower norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
  mcfarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair  and sank into his chair once more like one who is crushed qzmSEPqzm. 
  one moment  lestrade  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 half an hour more or less can make no difference to you  and the gentleman was about to give us an account of this very interesting affair  which might aid us in clearing it up qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think there will be no difficulty in clearing it up  said lestrade  grimly qzmSEPqzm. 
  none the less  with your permission  i should be much interested to hear his account qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  it is difficult for me to refuse you anything  for you have been of use to the force once or twice in the past  and we owe you a good turn at scotland yard  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time i must remain with my prisoner  and i am bound to warn him that anything he may say will appear in evidence against him qzmSEPqzm. 
  i wish nothing better  said our client qzmSEPqzm. 
 all i ask is that you should hear and recognise the absolute truth qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade looked at his watch qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill give you half an hour  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must explain first  said mcfarlane  that i knew nothing of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre qzmSEPqzm. 
 his name was familiar to me  for many years ago my parents were acquainted with him  but they drifted apart qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was very much surprised  therefore  when yesterday  about three oclock in the afternoon  he walked into my office in the city qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i was still more astonished when he told me the object of his visit qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had in his hand several sheets of a notebook  covered with scribbled writinghere they areand he laid them on my table qzmSEPqzm. 
  here is my will  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i want you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane  to cast it into proper legal shape qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will sit here while you do so qzmSEPqzm. 
  i set myself to copy it  and you can imagine my astonishment when i found that  with some reservations  he had left all his property to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a strange little  ferretlike man  with white eyelashes  and when i looked up at him i found his keen grey eyes fixed upon me with an amused expression qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could hardly believe my own senses as i read the terms of the will  but he explained that he was a bachelor with hardly any living relation  that he had known my parents in his youth  and that he had always heard of me as a very deserving young man  and was assured that his money would be in worthy hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  i could only stammer out my thanks qzmSEPqzm. 
 the will was duly finished  signed  and witnessed by my clerk qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is it on the blue paper  and these slips  as i have explained  are the rough draft qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre then informed me that there were a number of documentsbuilding leases  titledeeds  mortgages  scrip  and so forthwhich it was necessary that i should see and understand qzmSEPqzm. 
 he said that his mind would not be easy until the whole thing was settled  and he begged me to come out to his house at norwood that night  bringing the will with me  and to arrange matters qzmSEPqzm. 
 remember  my boy  not one word to your parents about the affair until everything is settled qzmSEPqzm. 
 we will keep it as a little surprise for them qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was very insistent upon this point  and made me promise it faithfully qzmSEPqzm. 
  you can imagine  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that i was not in a humour to refuse him anything that he might ask qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was my benefactor  and all my desire was to carry out his wishes in every particular qzmSEPqzm. 
 i sent a telegram home  therefore  to say that i had important business on hand  and that it was impossible for me to say how late i might be qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 oldacre had told me that he would like me to have supper with him at nine  as he might not be home before that hour qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had some difficulty in finding his house  however  and it was nearly halfpast before i reached it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i found him  one moment said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 who opened the door  a middleaged woman  who was  i suppose  his housekeeper qzmSEPqzm. 
  and it was she  i presume  who mentioned your name  exactly  said mcfarlane qzmSEPqzm. 
  pray proceed qzmSEPqzm. 
  mcfarlane wiped his damp brow and then continued his narrative  i was shown by this woman into a sittingroom  where a frugal supper was laid out qzmSEPqzm. 
 afterwards mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre led me into his bedroom  in which there stood a heavy safe qzmSEPqzm. 
 this he opened and took out a mass of documents  which we went over together qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was between eleven and twelve when we finished qzmSEPqzm. 
 he remarked that we must not disturb the housekeeper qzmSEPqzm. 
 he showed me out through his own french window  which had been open all this time qzmSEPqzm. 
  was the blind down asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will not be sure  but i believe that it was only half down qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  i remember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not find my stick  and he said  never mind  my boy  i shall see a good deal of you now  i hope  and i will keep your stick until you come back to claim it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i left him there  the safe open  and the papers made up in packets upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was so late that i could not get back to blackheath  so i spent the night at the anerley arms  and i knew nothing more until i read of this horrible affair in the morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  anything more that you would like to ask  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes said lestrade  whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during this remarkable explanation qzmSEPqzm. 
  not until i have been to blackheath qzmSEPqzm. 
  you mean to norwood  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  yes  no doubt that is what i must have meant  said holmes  with his enigmatical smile qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade had learned by more experiences than he would care to acknowledge that that razorlike brain could cut through that which was impenetrable to him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw him look curiously at my companion qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think i should like to have a word with you presently  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane  two of my constables are at the door and there is a fourwheeler waiting qzmSEPqzm. 
 the wretched young man arose  and with a last beseeching glance at us walked from the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 the officers conducted him to the cab  but lestrade remained qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of the will  and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon his face qzmSEPqzm. 
  there are some points about that document  lestrade  are there not  said he  pushing them over qzmSEPqzm. 
  the official looked at them with a puzzled expression qzmSEPqzm. 
  i can read the first few lines  and these in the middle of the second page  and one or two at the end qzmSEPqzm. 
 those are as clear as print  said he  but the writing in between is very bad  and there are three places where i cannot read it at all qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you make of that said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  what do you make of it  that it was written in a train  the good writing represents stations  the bad writing movement  and the very bad writing passing over points qzmSEPqzm. 
 a scientific expert would pronounce at once that this was drawn up on a suburban line  since nowhere save in the immediate vicinity of a great city could there be so quick a succession of points qzmSEPqzm. 
 granting that his whole journey was occupied in drawing up the will  then the train was an express  only stopping once between norwood and london bridge qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade began to laugh qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 how does this bear on the case  well  it corroborates the young mans story to the extent that the will was drawn up by jonas oldacre in his journey yesterday qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is curiousis it notthat a man should draw up so important a document in so haphazard a fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
 it suggests that he did not think it was going to be of much practical importance qzmSEPqzm. 
 if a man drew up a will which he did not intend ever to be effective he might do it so qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  he drew up his own deathwarrant at the same time  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  you think so  dont you  well  it is quite possible  but the case is not clear to me yet qzmSEPqzm. 
  not clear well  if that isnt clear  what could be clear here is a young man who learns suddenly that if a certain older man dies he will succeed to a fortune qzmSEPqzm. 
 what does he do he says nothing to anyone  but he arranges that he shall go out on some pretext to see his client that night  he waits until the only other person in the house is in bed  and then in the solitude of a mans room he murders him  burns his body in the woodpile  and departs to a neighbouring hotel qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bloodstains in the room and also on the stick are very slight qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is probable that he imagined his crime to be a bloodless one  and hoped that if the body were consumed it would hide all traces of the method of his deathtraces which for some reason must have pointed to him qzmSEPqzm. 
 is all this not obvious  it strikes me  my good lestrade  as being just a trifle too obvious   said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 you do not add imagination to your other great qualities  but if you could for one moment put yourself in the place of this young man  would you choose the very night after the will had been made to commit your crime would it not seem dangerous to you to make so very close a relation between the two incidents again  would you choose an occasion when you are known to be in the house  when a servant has let you in and  finally  would you take the great pains to conceal the body and yet leave your own stick as a sign that you were the criminal confess  lestrade  that all this is very unlikely qzmSEPqzm. 
  as to the stick  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you know as well as i do that a criminal is often flurried and does things which a cool man would avoid qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was very likely afraid to go back to the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 give me another theory that would fit the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could very easily give you halfadozen  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 here  for example  is a very possible and even probable one qzmSEPqzm. 
 i make you a free present of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 the older man is showing documents which are of evident value qzmSEPqzm. 
 a passing tramp sees them through the window  the blind of which is only half down qzmSEPqzm. 
 exit the solicitor qzmSEPqzm. 
 enter the tramp he seizes a stick  which he observes there  kills oldacre  and departs after burning the body qzmSEPqzm. 
  why should the tramp burn the body  for the matter of that why should mcfarlane  to hide some evidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  possibly the tramp wanted to hide that any murder at all had been committed qzmSEPqzm. 
  and why did the tramp take nothing  because they were papers that he could not negotiate qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade shook his head  though it seemed to me that his manner was less absolutely assured than before qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  you may look for your tramp  and while you are finding him we will hold on to our man qzmSEPqzm. 
 the future will show which is right qzmSEPqzm. 
 just notice this point  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes that so far as we know none of the papers were removed  and that the prisoner is the one man in the world who had no reason for removing them  since he was heiratlaw and would come into them in any case qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend seemed struck by this remark qzmSEPqzm. 
  i dont mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very strongly in favour of your theory  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i only wish to point out that there are other theories possible qzmSEPqzm. 
 as you say  the future will decide qzmSEPqzm. 
 good morning i dare say that in the course of the day i shall drop in at norwood and see how you are getting on qzmSEPqzm. 
  when the detective departed my friend rose and made his preparations for the days work with the alert air of a man who has a congenial task before him qzmSEPqzm. 
  my first movement  watson  said he  as he bustled into his frockcoat  must  as i said  be in the direction of blackheath qzmSEPqzm. 
  and why not norwood  because we have in this case one singular incident coming close to the heels of another singular incident qzmSEPqzm. 
 the police are making the mistake of concentrating their attention upon the second  because it happens to be the one which is actually criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 but it is evident to me that the logical way to approach the case is to begin by trying to throw some light upon the first incidentthe curious will  so suddenly made  and to so unexpected an heir qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may do something to simplify what followed qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  my dear fellow  i dont think you can help me qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no prospect of danger  or i should not dream of stirring out without you qzmSEPqzm. 
 i trust that when i see you in the evening i will be able to report that i have been able to do something for this unfortunate youngster who has thrown himself upon my protection qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was late when my friend returned  and i could see by a glance at his haggard and anxious face that the high hopes with which he had started had not been fulfilled qzmSEPqzm. 
 for an hour he droned away upon his violin  endeavouring to soothe his own ruffled spirits qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last he flung down the instrument and plunged into a detailed account of his misadventures qzmSEPqzm. 
  its all going wrong  watsonall as wrong as it can go qzmSEPqzm. 
 i kept a bold face before lestrade  but  upon my soul  i believe that for once the fellow is on the right track and we are on the wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 all my instincts are one way and all the facts are the other  and i much fear that british juries have not yet attained that pitch of intelligence when they will give the preference to my theories over lestrades facts qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you go to blackheath  yes  watson  i went there  and i found very quickly that the late lamented oldacre was a pretty considerable blackguard qzmSEPqzm. 
 the father was away in search of his son qzmSEPqzm. 
 the mother was at homea little  fluffy  blueeyed person  in a tremor of fear and indignation qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  she would not admit even the possibility of his guilt qzmSEPqzm. 
 but she would not express either surprise or regret over the fate of oldacre qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the contrary  she spoke of him with such bitterness that she was unconsciously considerably strengthening the case of the police  for  of course  if her son had heard her speak of the man in this fashion it would predispose him towards hatred and violence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was more like a malignant and cunning ape than a human being  said she  and he always was  ever since he was a young man qzmSEPqzm. 
  you knew him at that time said i qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  i knew him well  in fact  he was an old suitor of mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank heaven that i had the sense to turn away from him and to marry a better  if a poorer  man qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was engaged to him  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  when i heard a shocking story of how he had turned a cat loose in an aviary  and i was so horrified at his brutal cruelty that i would have nothing more to do with him qzmSEPqzm. 
 she rummaged in a bureau  and presently she produced a photograph of a woman  shamefully defaced and mutilated with a knife qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is my own photograph  she said qzmSEPqzm. 
 he sent it to me in that state  with his curse  upon my wedding morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said i  at least he has forgiven you now  since he has left all his property to your son qzmSEPqzm. 
  neither my son nor i want anything from jonas oldacre  dead or alive  she cried  with a proper spirit qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a god in heaven  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and that same god who has punished that wicked man will show in his own good time that my sons hands are guiltless of his blood qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i tried one or two leads  but could get at nothing which would help our hypothesis  and several points which would make against it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i gave it up at last and off i went to norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
  this place  deep dene house  is a big modern villa of staring brick  standing back in its own grounds  with a laurelclumped lawn in front of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 to the right and some distance back from the road was the timberyard which had been the scene of the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 heres a rough plan on a leaf of my notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 this window on the left is the one which opens into oldacres room qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can look into it from the road  you see qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is about the only bit of consolation i have had today qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade was not there  but his head constable did the honours qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had just made a great treasuretrove qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had spent the morning raking among the ashes of the burned woodpile  and besides the charred organic remains they had secured several discoloured metal discs qzmSEPqzm. 
 i examined them with care  and there was no doubt that they were trouser buttons qzmSEPqzm. 
 i even distinguished that one of them was marked with the name of hyams  who was oldacres tailor qzmSEPqzm. 
 i then worked the lawn very carefully for signs and traces  but this drought has made everything as hard as iron qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing was to be seen save that some body or bundle had been dragged through a low privet hedge which is in a line with the woodpile qzmSEPqzm. 
 all that  of course  fits in with the official theory qzmSEPqzm. 
 i crawled about the lawn with an august sun on my back  but i got up at the end of an hour no wiser than before qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  after this fiasco i went into the bedroom and examined that also qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bloodstains were very slight  mere smears and discolorations  but undoubtedly fresh qzmSEPqzm. 
 the stick had been removed  but there also the marks were slight qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no doubt about the stick belonging to our client qzmSEPqzm. 
 he admits it qzmSEPqzm. 
 footmarks of both men could be made out on the carpet  but none of any third person  which again is a trick for the other side qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were piling up their score all the time and we were at a standstill qzmSEPqzm. 
  only one little gleam of hope did i getand yet it amounted to nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 i examined the contents of the safe  most of which had been taken out and left on the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 the papers had been made up into sealed envelopes  one or two of which had been opened by the police qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were not  so far as i could judge  of any great value  nor did the bankbook show that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 oldacre was in such very affluent circumstances qzmSEPqzm. 
 but it seemed to me that all the papers were not there qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were allusions to some deedspossibly the more valuablewhich i could not find qzmSEPqzm. 
 this  of course  if we could definitely prove it  would turn lestrades argument against himself  for who would steal a thing if he knew that he would shortly inherit it  finally  having drawn every other cover and picked up no scent  i tried my luck with the housekeeper qzmSEPqzm. 
 mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 lexington is her name  a little  dark  silent person  with suspicious and sidelong eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 she could tell us something if she wouldi am convinced of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 but she was as close as wax qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  she had let mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane in at halfpast nine qzmSEPqzm. 
 she wished her hand had withered before she had done so qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had gone to bed at halfpast ten qzmSEPqzm. 
 her room was at the other end of the house  and she could hear nothing of what passed qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane had left his hat  and to the best of her belief his stick  in the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had been awakened by the alarm of fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 her poor  dear master had certainly been murdered qzmSEPqzm. 
 had he any enemies well  every man had enemies  but mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 oldacre kept himself very much to himself  and only met people in the way of business qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had seen the buttons  and was sure that they belonged to the clothes which he had worn last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 the woodpile was very dry  for it had not rained for a month qzmSEPqzm. 
 it burned like tinder  and by the time she reached the spot nothing could be seen but flames qzmSEPqzm. 
 she and all the firemen smelled the burned flesh from inside it qzmSEPqzm. 
 she knew nothing of the papers  nor of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 oldacres private affairs qzmSEPqzm. 
  so  my dear watson  theres my report of a failure qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yetand yethe clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of convictioni know its all wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 i feel it in my bones qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is something that has not come out  and that housekeeper knows it qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a sort of sulky defiance in her eyes  which only goes with guilty knowledge qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  theres no good talking any more about it  watson  but unless some lucky chance comes our way i fear that the norwood disappearance case will not figure in that chronicle of our successes which i foresee that a patient public will sooner or later have to endure qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely  said i  the mans appearance would go far with any jury  that is a dangerous argument  my dear watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember that terrible murderer  bert stevens  who wanted us to get him off in  qzmNUMqzm  was there ever a more mildmannered  sundayschool young man  it is true qzmSEPqzm. 
  unless we succeed in establishing an alternative theory this man is lost qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can hardly find a flaw in the case which can now be presented against him  and all further investigation has served to strengthen it qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  there is one curious little point about those papers which may serve us as the startingpoint for an inquiry qzmSEPqzm. 
 on looking over the bankbook i found that the low state of the balance was principally due to large cheques which have been made out during the last year to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cornelius qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess that i should be interested to know who this mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cornelius may be with whom a retired builder has such very large transactions qzmSEPqzm. 
 is it possible that he has had a hand in the affair cornelius might be a broker  but we have found no scrip to correspond with these large payments qzmSEPqzm. 
 failing any other indication my researches must now take the direction of an inquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these cheques qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i fear  my dear fellow  that our case will end ingloriously by lestrade hanging our client  which will certainly be a triumph for scotland yard qzmSEPqzm. 
  i do not know how far sherlock holmes took any sleep that night  but when i came down to breakfast i found him pale and harassed  his bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the carpet round his chair was littered with cigaretteends and with the early editions of the morning papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 an open telegram lay upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you think of this  watson he asked  tossing it across qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was from norwood  and ran as follows       important fresh evidence to hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  mcfarlanes guilt      definitely established qzmSEPqzm. 
  advise you to abandon case qzmSEPqzm. 
      lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  this sounds serious  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is lestrades little cockadoodle of victory  holmes answered  with a bitter smile qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet it may be premature to abandon the case qzmSEPqzm. 
 after all  important fresh evidence is a twoedged thing  and may possibly cut in a very different direction to that which lestrade imagines qzmSEPqzm. 
 take your breakfast  watson  and we will go out together and see what we can do qzmSEPqzm. 
 i feel as if i shall need your company and your moral support today qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend had no breakfast himself  for it was one of his peculiarities that in his more intense moments he would permit himself no food  and i have known him presume upon his iron strength until he has fainted from pure inanition qzmSEPqzm. 
 at present i cannot spare energy and nerve force for digestion  he would say in answer to my medical remonstrances qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was not surprised  therefore  when this morning he left his untouched meal behind him and started with me for norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
 a crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round deep dene house  which was just such a suburban villa as i had pictured qzmSEPqzm. 
 within the gates lestrade met us  his face flushed with victory  his manner grossly triumphant qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  have you proved us to be wrong yet have you found your tramp he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have formed no conclusion whatever  my companion answered qzmSEPqzm. 
  but we formed ours yesterday  and now it proves to be correct  so you must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of you this time  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  you certainly have the air of something unusual having occurred  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade laughed loudly qzmSEPqzm. 
  you dont like being beaten any more than the rest of us do  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 a man cant expect always to have it his own way  can he  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson step this way  if you please  gentlemen  and i think i can convince you once for all that it was john mcfarlane who did this crime qzmSEPqzm. 
  he led us through the passage and out into a dark hall beyond qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is where young mcfarlane must have come out to get his hat after the crime was done  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  look at this qzmSEPqzm. 
 with dramatic suddenness he struck a match and by its light exposed a stain of blood upon the whitewashed wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 as he held the match nearer i saw that it was more than a stain qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the wellmarked print of a thumb qzmSEPqzm. 
  look at that with your magnifying glass  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  i am doing so qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are aware that no two thumb marks are alike  i have heard something of the kind qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  then  will you please compare that print with this wax impression of young mcfarlanes right thumb  taken by my orders this morning  as he held the waxen print close to the bloodstain it did not take a magnifying glass to see that the two were undoubtedly from the same thumb qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident to me that our unfortunate client was lost qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is final  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  that is final  i involuntarily echoed qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is final  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  something in his tone caught my ear  and i turned to look at him qzmSEPqzm. 
 an extraordinary change had come over his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was writhing with inward merriment qzmSEPqzm. 
 his two eyes were shining like stars qzmSEPqzm. 
 it seemed to me that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a convulsive attack of laughter qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me dear me he said at last qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  now  who would have thought it and how deceptive appearances may be  to be sure such a nice young man to look at it is a lesson to us not to trust our own judgment  is it not  lestrade  yes  some of us are a little too much inclined to be cocksure  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 the mans insolence was maddening  but we could not resent it qzmSEPqzm. 
  what a providential thing that this young man should press his right thumb against the wall in taking his hat from the peg such a very natural action  too  if you come to think of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was outwardly calm  but his whole body gave a wriggle of suppressed excitement as he spoke qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  lestrade  who made this remarkable discovery  it was the housekeeper  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 lexington  who drew the night constables attention to it qzmSEPqzm. 
  where was the night constable  he remained on guard in the bedroom where the crime was committed  so as to see that nothing was touched qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why didnt the police see this mark yesterday  well  we had no particular reason to make a careful examination of the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  its not in a very prominent place  as you see qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  no  of course not qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose there is no doubt that the mark was there yesterday  lestrade looked at holmes as if he thought he was going out of his mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess that i was myself surprised both at his hilarious manner and at his rather wild observation qzmSEPqzm. 
  i dont know whether you think that mcfarlane came out of gaol in the dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence against himself   said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 i leave it to any expert in the world whether that is not the mark of his thumb qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is unquestionably the mark of his thumb qzmSEPqzm. 
  there  thats enough  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am a practical man  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and when i have got my evidence i come to my conclusions qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you have anything to say you will find me writing my report in the sittingroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes had recovered his equanimity  though i still seemed to detect gleams of amusement in his expression qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me  this is a very sad development  watson  is it not said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet there are singular points about it which hold out some hopes for our client qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am delighted to hear it  said i  heartily qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was afraid it was all up with him qzmSEPqzm. 
  i would hardly go so far as to say that  my dear watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fact is that there is one really serious flaw in this evidence to which our friend attaches so much importance qzmSEPqzm. 
  indeed  holmes what is it  only this that i know that that mark was not there when i examined the hall yesterday qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  watson  let us have a little stroll round in the sunshine qzmSEPqzm. 
  with a confused brain  but with a heart into which some warmth of hope was returning  i accompanied my friend in a walk round the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes took each face of the house in turn and examined it with great interest qzmSEPqzm. 
 he then led the way inside and went over the whole building from basement to attics qzmSEPqzm. 
 most of the rooms were unfurnished  but none the less holmes inspected them all minutely qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally  on the top corridor  which ran outside three untenanted bedrooms  he again was seized with a spasm of merriment qzmSEPqzm. 
  there are really some very unique features about this case  watson   said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think it is time now that we took our friend lestrade into our confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has had his little smile at our expense  and perhaps we may do as much by him if my reading of this problem proves to be correct qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  yes  i think i see how we should approach it qzmSEPqzm. 
  the scotland yard inspector was still writing in the parlour when holmes interrupted him qzmSEPqzm. 
  i understood that you were writing a report of this case  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  so i am qzmSEPqzm. 
  dont you think it may be a little premature i cant help thinking that your evidence is not complete qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade knew my friend too well to disregard his words qzmSEPqzm. 
 he laid down his pen and looked curiously at him qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you mean  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  only that there is an important witness whom you have not seen qzmSEPqzm. 
  can you produce him  i think i can qzmSEPqzm. 
  then do so qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will do my best qzmSEPqzm. 
 how many constables have you  there are three within call qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 may i ask if they are all large  ablebodied men with powerful voices  i have no doubt they are  though i fail to see what their voices have to do with it qzmSEPqzm. 
  perhaps i can help you to see that and one or two other things as well  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 kindly summon your men  and i will try qzmSEPqzm. 
  five minutes later three policemen had assembled in the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  in the outhouse you will find a considerable quantity of straw  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will ask you to carry in two bundles of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think it will be of the greatest assistance in producing the witness whom i require qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank you very much qzmSEPqzm. 
 i believe you have some matches in your pocket  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade  i will ask you all to accompany me to the top landing qzmSEPqzm. 
  as i have said  there was a broad corridor there  which ran outside three empty bedrooms qzmSEPqzm. 
 at one end of the corridor we were all marshalled by sherlock holmes  the constables grinning and lestrade staring at my friend with amazement  expectation  and derision chasing each other across his features qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes stood before us with the air of a conjurer who is performing a trick qzmSEPqzm. 
  would you kindly send one of your constables for two buckets of water put the straw on the floor here  free from the wall on either side qzmSEPqzm. 
 now i think that we are all ready qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrades face had begun to grow red and angry qzmSEPqzm. 
  i dont know whether you are playing a game with us  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you know anything  you can surely say it without all this tomfoolery qzmSEPqzm. 
  i assure you  my good lestrade  that i have an excellent reason for everything that i do qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may possibly remember that you chaffed me a little some hours ago  when the sun seemed on your side of the hedge  so you must not grudge me a little pomp and ceremony now qzmSEPqzm. 
 might i ask you  watson  to open that window  and then to put a match to the edge of the straw  i did so  and  driven by the draught  a coil of grey smoke swirled down the corridor  while the dry straw crackled and flamed qzmSEPqzm. 
  now we must see if we can find this witness for you  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 might i ask you all to join in the cry of fire now  then  one  two  three  fire we all yelled qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will trouble you once again qzmSEPqzm. 
  fire  just once more  gentlemen  and all together qzmSEPqzm. 
  fire the shout must have rung over norwood qzmSEPqzm. 
  it had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened qzmSEPqzm. 
 a door suddenly flew open out of what appeared to be solid wall at the end of the corridor  and a little  wizened man darted out of it  like a rabbit out of its burrow qzmSEPqzm. 
  capital said holmes  calmly qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  a bucket of water over the straw qzmSEPqzm. 
 that will do lestrade  allow me to present you with your principal missing witness  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jonas oldacre qzmSEPqzm. 
  the detective stared at the newcomer with blank amazement qzmSEPqzm. 
 the latter was blinking in the bright light of the corridor  and peering at us and at the smouldering fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was an odious facecrafty  vicious  malignant  with shifty  lightgrey eyes and white eyelashes qzmSEPqzm. 
  whats this  then said lestrade at last qzmSEPqzm. 
 what have you been doing all this time  eh  oldacre gave an uneasy laugh  shrinking back from the furious red face of the angry detective qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have done no harm qzmSEPqzm. 
  no harm you have done your best to get an innocent man hanged qzmSEPqzm. 
 if it wasnt for this gentleman here  i am not sure that you would not have succeeded qzmSEPqzm. 
  the wretched creature began to whimper qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sure  sir  it was only my practical joke qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh a joke  was it you wont find the laugh on your side  i promise you qzmSEPqzm. 
 take him down and keep him in the sittingroom until i come qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  he continued  when they had gone  i could not speak before the constables  but i dont mind saying  in the presence of dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  that this is the brightest thing that you have done yet  though it is a mystery to me how you did it qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have saved an innocent mans life  and you have prevented a very grave scandal  which would have ruined my reputation in the force qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes smiled and clapped lestrade upon the shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  instead of being ruined  my good sir  you will find that your reputation has been enormously enhanced qzmSEPqzm. 
 just make a few alterations in that report which you were writing  and they will understand how hard it is to throw dust in the eyes of inspector lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  and you dont want your name to appear  not at all qzmSEPqzm. 
 the work is its own reward qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps i shall get the credit also at some distant day when i permit my zealous historian to lay out his foolscap once moreeh  watson well  now  let us see where this rat has been lurking qzmSEPqzm. 
  a lathandplaster partition had been run across the passage six feet from the end  with a door cunningly concealed in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was lit within by slits under the eaves qzmSEPqzm. 
 a few articles of furniture and a supply of food and water were within  together with a number of books and papers qzmSEPqzm. 
  theres the advantage of being a builder  said holmes  as we came out qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was able to fix up his own little hidingplace without any confederatesave  of course  that precious housekeeper of his  whom i should lose no time in adding to your bag  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill take your advice qzmSEPqzm. 
 but how did you know of this place  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i paced one corridor and found it six feet shorter than the corresponding one below  it was pretty clear where he was qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought he had not the nerve to lie quiet before an alarm of fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 we could  of course  have gone in and taken him  but it amused me to make him reveal himself  besides  i owed you a little mystification  lestrade  for your chaff in the morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  sir  you certainly got equal with me on that qzmSEPqzm. 
 but how in the world did you know that he was in the house at all  the thumbmark  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 you said it was final  and so it was  in a very different sense qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew it had not been there the day before qzmSEPqzm. 
 i pay a good deal of attention to matters of detail  as you may have observed  and i had examined the hall and was sure that the wall was clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore  it had been put on during the night qzmSEPqzm. 
  but how  very simply qzmSEPqzm. 
 when those packets were sealed up  jonas oldacre got mcfarlane to secure one of the seals by putting his thumb upon the soft wax qzmSEPqzm. 
 it would be done so quickly and so naturally that i dare say the young man himself has no recollection of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 very likely it just so happened  and oldacre had himself no notion of the use he would put it to qzmSEPqzm. 
 brooding over the case in that den of his  it suddenly struck him what absolutely damning evidence he could make against mcfarlane by using that thumbmark qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the simplest thing in the world for him to take a wax impression from the seal  to moisten it in as much blood as he could get from a pinprick  and to put the mark upon the wall during the night  either with his own hand or with that of his housekeeper qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you examine among those documents which he took with him into his retreat i will lay you a wager that you find the seal with the thumbmark upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
  wonderful said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 wonderful its all as clear as crystal  as you put it qzmSEPqzm. 
 but what is the object of this deep deception  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  it was amusing to me to see how the detectives overbearing manner had changed suddenly to that of a child asking questions of its teacher qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i dont think that is very hard to explain qzmSEPqzm. 
 a very deep  malicious  vindictive person is the gentleman who is now awaiting us downstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 you know that he was once refused by mcfarlanes mother you dont i told you that you should go to blackheath first and norwood afterwards qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  this injury  as he would consider it  has rankled in his wicked  scheming brain  and all his life he has longed for vengeance  but never seen his chance qzmSEPqzm. 
 during the last year or two things have gone against himsecret speculation  i thinkand he finds himself in a bad way qzmSEPqzm. 
 he determines to swindle his creditors  and for this purpose he pays large cheques to a certain mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cornelius  who is  i imagine  himself under another name qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have not traced these cheques yet  but i have no doubt that they were banked under that name at some provincial town where oldacre from time to time led a double existence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he intended to change his name altogether  draw this money  and vanish  starting life again elsewhere qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  thats likely enough qzmSEPqzm. 
  it would strike him that in disappearing he might throw all pursuit off his track  and at the same time have an ample and crushing revenge upon his old sweetheart  if he could give the impression that he had been murdered by her only child qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a masterpiece of villainy  and he carried it out like a master qzmSEPqzm. 
 the idea of the will  which would give an obvious motive for the crime  the secret visit unknown to his own parents  the retention of the stick  the blood  and the animal remains and buttons in the woodpile  all were admirable qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a net from which it seemed to me a few hours ago that there was no possible escape qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he had not that supreme gift of the artist  the knowledge of when to stop qzmSEPqzm. 
 he wished to improve that which was already perfectto draw the rope tighter yet round the neck of his unfortunate victimand so he ruined all qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us descend  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are just one or two questions that i would ask him qzmSEPqzm. 
  the malignant creature was seated in his own parlour with a policeman upon each side of him qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a joke  my good sir  a practical joke  nothing more  he whined incessantly qzmSEPqzm. 
 i assure you  sir  that i simply concealed myself in order to see the effect of my disappearance  and i am sure that you would not be so unjust as to imagine that i would have allowed any harm to befall poor young mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 mcfarlane qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats for a jury to decide  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyhow  we shall have you on a charge of conspiracy  if not for attempted murder qzmSEPqzm. 
  and youll probably find that your creditors will impound the banking account of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cornelius  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  the little man started and turned his malignant eyes upon my friend qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have to thank you for a good deal  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps ill pay my debt some day qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes smiled indulgently qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fancy that for some few years you will find your time very fully occupied  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  what was it you put into the woodpile besides your old trousers a dead dog  or rabbits  or what you wont tell dear me  how very unkind of you well  well  i dare say that a couple of rabbits would account both for the blood and for the charred ashes qzmSEPqzm. 
 if ever you write an account  watson  you can make rabbits serve your turn qzmSEPqzm. 
     the adventure of the dancing men qzmSEPqzm. 
   holmes had been seated for some hours in silence with his long  thin back curved over a chemical vessel in which he was brewing a particularly malodorous product qzmSEPqzm. 
 his head was sunk upon his breast  and he looked from my point of view like a strange  lank bird  with dull grey plumage and a black topknot qzmSEPqzm. 
  so  watson  said he  suddenly  you do not propose to invest in south african securities  i gave a start of astonishment qzmSEPqzm. 
 accustomed as i was to holmess curious faculties  this sudden intrusion into my most intimate thoughts was utterly inexplicable qzmSEPqzm. 
  how on earth do you know that i asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  he wheeled round upon his stool  with a steaming testtube in his hand and a gleam of amusement in his deepset eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  watson  confess yourself utterly taken aback  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am qzmSEPqzm. 
  i ought to make you sign a paper to that effect qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  because in five minutes you will say that it is all so absurdly simple qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sure that i shall say nothing of the kind qzmSEPqzm. 
  you see  my dear watsonhe propped his testtube in the rack and began to lecture with the air of a professor addressing his classit is not really difficult to construct a series of inferences  each dependent upon its predecessor and each simple in itself qzmSEPqzm. 
 if  after doing so  one simply knocks out all the central inferences and presents ones audience with the startingpoint and the conclusion  one may produce a startling  though possibly a meretricious  effect qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  it was not really difficult  by an inspection of the groove between your left forefinger and thumb  to feel sure that you did not propose to invest your small capital in the goldfields qzmSEPqzm. 
  i see no connection qzmSEPqzm. 
  very likely not  but i can quickly show you a close connection qzmSEPqzm. 
 here are the missing links of the very simple chain  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 you had chalk between your left finger and thumb when you returned from the club last night qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 you put chalk there when you play billiards to steady the cue qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 you never play billiards except with thurston qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 you told me four weeks ago that thurston had an option on some south african property which would expire in a month  and which he desired you to share with him qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 your chequebook is locked in my drawer  and you have not asked for the key qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 you do not propose to invest your money in this manner qzmSEPqzm. 
  how absurdly simple i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so said he  a little nettled qzmSEPqzm. 
 every problem becomes very childish when once it is explained to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 here is an unexplained one qzmSEPqzm. 
 see what you can make of that  friend watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 he tossed a sheet of paper upon the table and turned once more to his chemical analysis qzmSEPqzm. 
  i looked with amazement at the absurd hieroglyphics upon the paper qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  holmes  it is a childs drawing  i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  thats your idea  what else should it be  that is what mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt  of riding thorpe manor  norfolk  is very anxious to know qzmSEPqzm. 
 this little conundrum came by the first post  and he was to follow by the next train qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres a ring at the bell  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should not be very much surprised if this were he qzmSEPqzm. 
  a heavy step was heard upon the stairs  and an instant later there entered a tall  ruddy  cleanshaven gentleman  whose clear eyes and florid cheeks told of a life led far from the fogs of baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seemed to bring a whiff of his strong  fresh  bracing  eastcoast air with him as he entered qzmSEPqzm. 
 having shaken hands with each of us  he was about to sit down when his eye rested upon the paper with the curious markings  which i had just examined and left upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  what do you make of these he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 they told me that you were fond of queer mysteries  and i dont think you can find a queerer one than that qzmSEPqzm. 
 i sent the paper on ahead so that you might have time to study it before i came qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is certainly rather a curious production  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 at first sight it would appear to be some childish prank qzmSEPqzm. 
 it consists of a number of absurd little figures dancing across the paper upon which they are drawn qzmSEPqzm. 
 why should you attribute any importance to so grotesque an object  i never should  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 but my wife does qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is frightening her to death qzmSEPqzm. 
 she says nothing  but i can see terror in her eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats why i want to sift the matter to the bottom qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes held up the paper so that the sunlight shone full upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a page torn from a notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 the markings were done in pencil  and ran in this way  graphic  holmes examined it for some time  and then  folding it carefully up  he placed it in his pocketbook qzmSEPqzm. 
  this promises to be a most interesting and unusual case  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 you gave me a few particulars in your letter  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt  but i should be very much obliged if you would kindly go over it all again for the benefit of my friend  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  im not much of a storyteller  said our visitor  nervously clasping and unclasping his great  strong hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 youll just ask me anything that i dont make clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill begin at the time of my marriage last year  but i want to say first of all that  though im not a rich man  my people have been at ridling thorpe for a matter of five centuries  and there is no better known family in the county of norfolk qzmSEPqzm. 
 last year i came up to london for the jubilee  and i stopped at a boardinghouse in russell square  because parker  the vicar of our parish  was staying in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was an american young lady therepatrick was the nameelsie patrick qzmSEPqzm. 
 in some way we became friends  until before my month was up i was as much in love as a man could be qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were quietly married at a registry office  and we returned to norfolk a wedded couple qzmSEPqzm. 
 youll think it very mad  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that a man of a good old family should marry a wife in this fashion  knowing nothing of her past or of her people  but if you saw her and knew her it would help you to understand qzmSEPqzm. 
  she was very straight about it  was elsie qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cant say that she did not give me every chance of getting out of it if i wished to do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have had some very disagreeable associations in my life  said she  i wish to forget all about them qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would rather never allude to the past  for it is very painful to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you take me  hilton  you will take a woman who has nothing that she need be personally ashamed of  but you will have to be content with my word for it  and to allow me to be silent as to all that passed up to the time when i became yours qzmSEPqzm. 
 if these conditions are too hard  then go back to norfolk and leave me to the lonely life in which you found me qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was only the day before our wedding that she said those very words to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i told her that i was content to take her on her own terms  and i have been as good as my word qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  we have been married now for a year  and very happy we have been qzmSEPqzm. 
 but about a month ago  at the end of june  i saw for the first time signs of trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
 one day my wife received a letter from america qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw the american stamp qzmSEPqzm. 
 she turned deadly white  read the letter  and threw it into the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 she made no allusion to it afterwards  and i made none  for a promise is a promise  but she has never known an easy hour from that moment qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is always a look of fear upon her facea look as if she were waiting and expecting qzmSEPqzm. 
 she would do better to trust me qzmSEPqzm. 
 she would find that i was her best friend qzmSEPqzm. 
 but until she speaks i can say nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 mind you  she is a truthful woman  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and whatever trouble there may have been in her past life it has been no fault of hers qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am only a simple norfolk squire  but there is not a man in england who ranks his family honour more highly than i do qzmSEPqzm. 
 she knows it well  and she knew it well before she married me qzmSEPqzm. 
 she would never bring any stain upon itof that i am sure qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  now i come to the queer part of my story qzmSEPqzm. 
 about a week agoit was the tuesday of last weeki found on one of the windowsills a number of absurd little dancing figures  like these upon the paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were scrawled with chalk qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought that it was the stableboy who had drawn them  but the lad swore he knew nothing about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyhow  they had come there during the night qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had them washed out  and i only mentioned the matter to my wife afterwards qzmSEPqzm. 
 to my surprise she took it very seriously  and begged me if any more came to let her see them qzmSEPqzm. 
 none did come for a week  and then yesterday morning i found this paper lying on the sundial in the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 i showed it to elsie  and down she dropped in a dead faint qzmSEPqzm. 
 since then she has looked like a woman in a dream  half dazed  and with terror always lurking in her eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was then that i wrote and sent the paper to you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was not a thing that i could take to the police  for they would have laughed at me  but you will tell me what to do qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am not a rich man  but if there is any danger threatening my little woman i would spend my last copper to shield her qzmSEPqzm. 
  he was a fine creature  this man of the old english soil  simple  straight  and gentle  with his great  earnest blue eyes and broad  comely face qzmSEPqzm. 
 his love for his wife and his trust in her shone in his features qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes had listened to his story with the utmost attention  and now he sat for some time in silent thought qzmSEPqzm. 
  dont you think  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cubitt  said he  at last  that your best plan would be to make a direct appeal to your wife  and to ask her to share her secret with you  hilton cubitt shook his massive head qzmSEPqzm. 
  a promise is a promise  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 if elsie wished to tell me she would qzmSEPqzm. 
 if not  it is not for me to force her confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i am justified in taking my own lineand i will qzmSEPqzm. 
  then i will help you with all my heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the first place  have you heard of any strangers being seen in your neighbourhood  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  i presume that it is a very quiet place qzmSEPqzm. 
 any fresh face would cause comment  in the immediate neighbourhood  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
 but we have several small wateringplaces not very far away qzmSEPqzm. 
 and the farmers take in lodgers qzmSEPqzm. 
  these hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning qzmSEPqzm. 
 if it is a purely arbitrary one it may be impossible for us to solve it qzmSEPqzm. 
 if  on the other hand  it is systematic  i have no doubt that we shall get to the bottom of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 but this particular sample is so short that i can do nothing  and the facts which you have brought me are so indefinite that we have no basis for an investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would suggest that you return to norfolk  that you keep a keen lookout  and that you take an exact copy of any fresh dancing men which may appear qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a thousand pities that we have not a reproduction of those which were done in chalk upon the windowsill qzmSEPqzm. 
 make a discreet inquiry also as to any strangers in the neighbourhood qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you have collected some fresh evidence come to me again qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is the best advice which i can give you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt qzmSEPqzm. 
 if there are any pressing fresh developments i shall be always ready to run down and see you in your norfolk home qzmSEPqzm. 
  the interview left sherlock holmes very thoughtful  and several times in the next few days i saw him take his slip of paper from his notebook and look long and earnestly at the curious figures inscribed upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
 he made no allusion to the affair  however  until one afternoon a fortnight or so later qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was going out when he called me back qzmSEPqzm. 
  you had better stay here  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  because i had a wire from hilton cubitt this morningyou remember hilton cubitt  of the dancing men he was to reach liverpool street at onetwenty qzmSEPqzm. 
 he may be here at any moment qzmSEPqzm. 
 i gather from his wire that there have been some new incidents of importance qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had not long to wait  for our norfolk squire came straight from the station as fast as a hansom could bring him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was looking worried and depressed  with tired eyes and a lined forehead qzmSEPqzm. 
  its getting on my nerves  this business  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said he  as he sank  like a wearied man  into an armchair qzmSEPqzm. 
 its bad enough to feel that you are surrounded by unseen  unknown folk  who have some kind of design upon you  but when  in addition to that  you know that it is just killing your wife by inches  then it becomes as much as flesh and blood can endure qzmSEPqzm. 
 shes wearing away under itjust wearing away before my eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  has she said anything yet  no  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  she has not qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet there have been times when the poor girl has wanted to speak  and yet could not quite bring herself to take the plunge qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have tried to help her  but i dare say i did it clumsily  and scared her off from it qzmSEPqzm. 
 she has spoken about my old family  and our reputation in the county  and our pride in our unsullied honour  and i always felt it was leading to the point  but somehow it turned off before we got there qzmSEPqzm. 
  but you have found out something for yourself  a good deal  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have several fresh dancing men pictures for you to examine  and  what is more important  i have seen the fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
  what  the man who draws them  yes  i saw him at his work qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i will tell you everything in order qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i got back after my visit to you  the very first thing i saw next morning was a fresh crop of dancing men qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had been drawn in chalk upon the black wooden door of the toolhouse  which stands beside the lawn in full view of the front windows qzmSEPqzm. 
 i took an exact copy  and here it is qzmSEPqzm. 
 he unfolded a paper and laid it upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 here is a copy of the hieroglyphics  graphic  excellent said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 excellent pray continue qzmSEPqzm. 
  when i had taken the copy i rubbed out the marks  but two mornings later a fresh inscription had appeared qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have a copy of it here  graphic  holmes rubbed his hands and chuckled with delight qzmSEPqzm. 
  our material is rapidly accumulating  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  three days later a message was left scrawled upon paper  and placed under a pebble upon the sundial qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is qzmSEPqzm. 
 the characters are  as you see  exactly the same as the last one qzmSEPqzm. 
 after that i determined to lie in wait  so i got out my revolver and i sat up in my study  which overlooks the lawn and garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 about two in the morning i was seated by the window  all being dark save for the moonlight outside  when i heard steps behind me  and there was my wife in her dressinggown qzmSEPqzm. 
 she implored me to come to bed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i told her frankly that i wished to see who it was who played such absurd tricks upon us qzmSEPqzm. 
 she answered that it was some senseless practical joke  and that i should not take any notice of it qzmSEPqzm. 
  if it really annoys you  hilton  we might go and travel  you and i  and so avoid this nuisance qzmSEPqzm. 
  what  be driven out of our own house by a practical joker said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  we should have the whole county laughing at us qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  come to bed  said she  and we can discuss it in the morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  suddenly  as she spoke  i saw her white face grow whiter yet in the moonlight  and her hand tightened upon my shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
 something was moving in the shadow of the toolhouse qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw a dark  creeping figure which crawled round the corner and squatted in front of the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 seizing my pistol i was rushing out  when my wife threw her arms round me and held me with convulsive strength qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tried to throw her off  but she clung to me most desperately qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last i got clear  but by the time i had opened the door and reached the house the creature was gone qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had left a trace of his presence  however  for there on the door was the very same arrangement of dancing men which had already twice appeared  and which i have copied on that paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no other sign of the fellow anywhere  though i ran all over the grounds qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet the amazing thing is that he must have been there all the time  for when i examined the door again in the morning he had scrawled some more of his pictures under the line which i had already seen qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you that fresh drawing  yes  it is very short  but i made a copy of it  and here it is qzmSEPqzm. 
  again he produced a paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 the new dance was in this form  graphic  tell me  said holmesand i could see by his eyes that he was much excitedwas this a mere addition to the first  or did it appear to be entirely separate  it was on a different panel of the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent this is far the most important of all for our purpose qzmSEPqzm. 
 it fills me with hopes qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt  please continue your most interesting statement qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have nothing more to say  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  except that i was angry with my wife that night for having held me back when i might have caught the skulking rascal qzmSEPqzm. 
 she said that she feared that i might come to harm qzmSEPqzm. 
 for an instant it had crossed my mind that perhaps what she really feared was that he might come to harm  for i could not doubt that she knew who this man was and what he meant by these strange signals qzmSEPqzm. 
 but there is a tone in my wifes voice  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and a look in her eyes which forbid doubt  and i am sure that it was indeed my own safety that was in her mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres the whole case  and now i want your advice as to what i ought to do qzmSEPqzm. 
 my own inclination is to put halfadozen of my farm lads in the shrubbery  and when this fellow comes again to give him such a hiding that he will leave us in peace for the future qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fear it is too deep a case for such simple remedies  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 how long can you stay in london  i must go back today qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would not leave my wife alone all night for anything qzmSEPqzm. 
 she is very nervous and begged me to come back qzmSEPqzm. 
  i dare say you are right qzmSEPqzm. 
 but if you could have stopped i might possibly have been able to return with you in a day or two qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile you will leave me these papers  and i think that it is very likely that i shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and to throw some light upon your case qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes preserved his calm professional manner until our visitor had left us  although it was easy for me  who knew him so well  to see that he was profoundly excited qzmSEPqzm. 
 the moment that hilton cubitts broad back had disappeared through the door my comrade rushed to the table  laid out all the slips of paper containing dancing men in front of him  and threw himself into an intricate and elaborate calculation qzmSEPqzm. 
 for two hours i watched him as he covered sheet after sheet of paper with figures and letters  so completely absorbed in his task that he had evidently forgotten my presence qzmSEPqzm. 
 sometimes he was making progress and whistled and sang at his work  sometimes he was puzzled  and would sit for long spells with a furrowed brow and a vacant eye qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally he sprang from his chair with a cry of satisfaction  and walked up and down the room rubbing his hands together qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he wrote a long telegram upon a cable form qzmSEPqzm. 
 if my answer to this is as i hope  you will have a very pretty case to add to your collection  watson  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i expect that we shall be able to go down to norfolk tomorrow  and to take our friend some very definite news as to the secret of his annoyance qzmSEPqzm. 
  i confess that i was filled with curiosity  but i was aware that holmes liked to make his disclosures at his own time and in his own way  so i waited until it should suit him to take me into his confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  but there was a delay in that answering telegram  and two days of impatience followed  during which holmes pricked up his ears at every ring of the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the evening of the second there came a letter from hilton cubitt qzmSEPqzm. 
 all was quiet with him  save that a long inscription had appeared that morning upon the pedestal of the sundial qzmSEPqzm. 
 he inclosed a copy of it  which is here reproduced  graphic  holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes  and then suddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise and dismay qzmSEPqzm. 
 his face was haggard with anxiety qzmSEPqzm. 
  we have let this affair go far enough  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 is there a train to north walsham tonight  i turned up the timetable qzmSEPqzm. 
 the last had just gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  then we shall breakfast early and take the very first in the morning   said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 our presence is most urgently needed qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah here is our expected cablegram qzmSEPqzm. 
 one moment  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson  there may be an answer qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  that is quite as i expected qzmSEPqzm. 
 this message makes it even more essential that we should not lose an hour in letting hilton cubitt know how matters stand  for it is a singular and a dangerous web in which our simple norfolk squire is entangled qzmSEPqzm. 
  so  indeed  it proved  and as i come to the dark conclusion of a story which had seemed to me to be only childish and bizarre i experience once again the dismay and horror with which i was filled qzmSEPqzm. 
 would that i had some brighter ending to communicate to my readers  but these are the chronicles of fact  and i must follow to their dark crisis the strange chain of events which for some days made ridling thorpe manor a household word through the length and breadth of england qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had hardly alighted at north walsham  and mentioned the name of our destination  when the stationmaster hurried towards us qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose that you are the detectives from london said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  a look of annoyance passed over holmess face qzmSEPqzm. 
  what makes you think such a thing  because inspector martin from norwich has just passed through qzmSEPqzm. 
 but maybe you are the surgeons qzmSEPqzm. 
 shes not deador wasnt by last accounts qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may be in time to save her yetthough it be for the gallows qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmess brow was dark with anxiety qzmSEPqzm. 
  we are going to ridling thorpe manor  said he  but we have heard nothing of what has passed there qzmSEPqzm. 
  its a terrible business  said the stationmaster qzmSEPqzm. 
 they are shot  both mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt and his wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 she shot him and then herselfso the servants say qzmSEPqzm. 
 hes dead and her life is despaired of qzmSEPqzm. 
 dear  dear  one of the oldest families in the county of norfolk  and one of the most honoured qzmSEPqzm. 
  without a word holmes hurried to a carriage  and during the long seven miles drive he never opened his mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 seldom have i seen him so utterly despondent qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had been uneasy during all our journey from town  and i had observed that he had turned over the morning papers with anxious attention  but now this sudden realization of his worst fears left him in a blank melancholy qzmSEPqzm. 
 he leaned back in his seat  lost in gloomy speculation qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet there was much around to interest us  for we were passing through as singular a countryside as any in england  where a few scattered cottages represented the population of today  while on every hand enormous squaretowered churches bristled up from the flat  green landscape and told of the glory and prosperity of old east anglia qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last the violet rim of the german ocean appeared over the green edge of the norfolk coast  and the driver pointed with his whip to two old brick and timber gables which projected from a grove of trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats ridling thorpe manor  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  as we drove up to the porticoed front door i observed in front of it  beside the tennis lawn  the black toolhouse and the pedestalled sundial with which we had such strange associations qzmSEPqzm. 
 a dapper little man  with a quick  alert manner and a waxed moustache  had just descended from a high dogcart qzmSEPqzm. 
 he introduced himself as inspector martin  of the norfolk constabulary  and he was considerably astonished when he heard the name of my companion qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  the crime was only committed at three this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 how could you hear of it in london and get to the spot as soon as i  i anticipated it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i came in the hope of preventing it qzmSEPqzm. 
  then you must have important evidence of which we are ignorant  for they were said to be a most united couple qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have only the evidence of the dancing men  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will explain the matter to you later qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  since it is too late to prevent this tragedy  i am very anxious that i should use the knowledge which i possess in order to ensure that justice be done qzmSEPqzm. 
 will you associate me in your investigation  or will you prefer that i should act independently  i should be proud to feel that we were acting together  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes   said the inspector  earnestly qzmSEPqzm. 
  in that case i should be glad to hear the evidence and to examine the premises without an instant of unnecessary delay qzmSEPqzm. 
  inspector martin had the good sense to allow my friend to do things in his own fashion  and contented himself with carefully noting the results qzmSEPqzm. 
 the local surgeon  an old  whitehaired man  had just come down from mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitts room  and he reported that her injuries were serious  but not necessarily fatal qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bullet had passed through the front of her brain  and it would probably be some time before she could regain consciousness qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the question of whether she had been shot or had shot herself he would not venture to express any decided opinion qzmSEPqzm. 
 certainly the bullet had been discharged at very close quarters qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was only the one pistol found in the room  two barrels of which had been emptied qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt had been shot through the heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was equally conceivable that he had shot her and then himself  or that she had been the criminal  for the revolver lay upon the floor midway between them qzmSEPqzm. 
  has he been moved asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  we have moved nothing except the lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 we could not leave her lying wounded upon the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
  how long have you been here  doctor  since four oclock qzmSEPqzm. 
  anyone else  yes  the constable here qzmSEPqzm. 
  and you have touched nothing  nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have acted with great discretion qzmSEPqzm. 
 who sent for you  the housemaid  saunders qzmSEPqzm. 
  was it she who gave the alarm  she and mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 king  the cook qzmSEPqzm. 
  where are they now  in the kitchen  i believe qzmSEPqzm. 
  then i think we had better hear their story at once qzmSEPqzm. 
  the old hall  oakpanelled and highwindowed  had been turned into a court of investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes sat in a great  oldfashioned chair  his inexorable eyes gleaming out of his haggard face qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could read in them a set purpose to devote his life to this quest until the client whom he had failed to save should at last be avenged qzmSEPqzm. 
 the trim inspector martin  the old  greyheaded country doctor  myself  and a stolid village policeman made up the rest of that strange company qzmSEPqzm. 
  the two women told their story clearly enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had been aroused from their sleep by the sound of an explosion  which had been followed a minute later by a second one qzmSEPqzm. 
 they slept in adjoining rooms  and mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 king had rushed in to saunders qzmSEPqzm. 
 together they had descended the stairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 the door of the study was open and a candle was burning upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 their master lay upon his face in the centre of the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was quite dead qzmSEPqzm. 
 near the window his wife was crouching  her head leaning against the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was horribly wounded  and the side of her face was red with blood qzmSEPqzm. 
 she breathed heavily  but was incapable of saying anything qzmSEPqzm. 
 the passage  as well as the room  was full of smoke and the smell of powder qzmSEPqzm. 
 the window was certainly shut and fastened upon the inside qzmSEPqzm. 
 both women were positive upon the point qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had at once sent for the doctor and for the constable qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  with the aid of the groom and the stableboy  they had conveyed their injured mistress to her room qzmSEPqzm. 
 both she and her husband had occupied the bed qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was clad in her dresshe in his dressinggown  over his night clothes qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing had been moved in the study qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far as they knew there had never been any quarrel between husband and wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had always looked upon them as a very united couple qzmSEPqzm. 
  these were the main points of the servants evidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 in answer to inspector martin they were clear that every door was fastened upon the inside  and that no one could have escaped from the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 in answer to holmes they both remembered that they were conscious of the smell of powder from the moment that they ran out of their rooms upon the top floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 i commend that fact very carefully to your attention  said holmes to his professional colleague qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now i think that we are in a position to undertake a thorough examination of the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  the study proved to be a small chamber  lined on three sides with books  and with a writingtable facing an ordinary window  which looked out upon the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 our first attention was given to the body of the unfortunate squire  whose huge frame lay stretched across the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 his disordered dress showed that he had been hastily aroused from sleep qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bullet had been fired at him from the front  and had remained in his body after penetrating the heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 his death had certainly been instantaneous and painless qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no powdermarking either upon his dressinggown or on his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 according to the country surgeon the lady had stains upon her face  but none upon her hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  the absence of the latter means nothing  though its presence may mean everything  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 unless the powder from a badlyfitting cartridge happens to spurt backwards  one may fire many shots without leaving a sign qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would suggest that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cubitts body may now be removed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose  doctor  you have not recovered the bullet which wounded the lady  a serious operation will be necessary before that can be done qzmSEPqzm. 
 but there are still four cartridges in the revolver qzmSEPqzm. 
 two have been fired and two wounds inflicted  so that each bullet can be accounted for qzmSEPqzm. 
  so it would seem  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps you can account also for the bullet which has so obviously struck the edge of the window  he had turned suddenly  and his long  thin finger was pointing to a hole which had been drilled right through the lower windowsash about an inch above the bottom qzmSEPqzm. 
  by george cried the inspector qzmSEPqzm. 
 how ever did you see that  because i looked for it qzmSEPqzm. 
  wonderful said the country doctor qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are certainly right  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 then a third shot has been fired  and therefore a third person must have been present qzmSEPqzm. 
 but who could that have been and how could he have got away  that is the problem which we are now about to solve  said sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember  inspector martin  when the servants said that on leaving their room they were at once conscious of a smell of powder i remarked that the point was an extremely important one  yes  sir  but i confess i did not quite follow you qzmSEPqzm. 
  it suggested that at the time of the firing the window as well as the door of the room had been open qzmSEPqzm. 
 otherwise the fumes of powder could not have been blown so rapidly through the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 a draught in the room was necessary for that qzmSEPqzm. 
 both door and window were only open for a very short time  however qzmSEPqzm. 
  how do you prove that  because the candle has not guttered qzmSEPqzm. 
  capital cried the inspector qzmSEPqzm. 
 capital  feeling sure that the window had been open at the time of the tragedy i conceived that there might have been a third person in the affair  who stood outside this opening and fired through it qzmSEPqzm. 
 any shot directed at this person might hit the sash qzmSEPqzm. 
 i looked  and there  sure enough  was the bullet mark  but how came the window to be shut and fastened  the womans first instinct would be to shut and fasten the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 but  halloa what is this  it was a ladys handbag which stood upon the study tablea trim little handbag of crocodileskin and silver qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes opened it and turned the contents out qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were twenty fiftypound notes of the bank of england  held together by an indiarubber bandnothing else qzmSEPqzm. 
  this must be preserved  for it will figure in the trial  said holmes  as he handed the bag with its contents to the inspector qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is now necessary that we should try to throw some light upon this third bullet  which has clearly  from the splintering of the wood  been fired from inside the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should like to see mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 king  the cook  again qzmSEPqzm. 
 you said  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 king  that you were awakened by a loud explosion qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you said that  did you mean that it seemed to you to be louder than the second one  well  sir  it wakened me from my sleep  and so it is hard to judge qzmSEPqzm. 
 but it did seem very loud qzmSEPqzm. 
  you dont think that it might have been two shots fired almost at the same instant  i am sure i couldnt say  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  i believe that it was undoubtedly so qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rather think  inspector martin  that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach us qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you will kindly step round with me  we shall see what fresh evidence the garden has to offer qzmSEPqzm. 
  a flowerbed extended up to the study window  and we all broke into an exclamation as we approached it qzmSEPqzm. 
 the flowers were trampled down  and the soft soil was imprinted all over with footmarks qzmSEPqzm. 
 large  masculine feet they were  with peculiarly long  sharp toes qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes hunted about among the grass and leaves like a retriever after a wounded bird qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  with a cry of satisfaction  he bent forward and picked up a little brazen cylinder qzmSEPqzm. 
  i thought so  said he  the revolver had an ejector  and here is the third cartridge qzmSEPqzm. 
 i really think  inspector martin  that our case is almost complete qzmSEPqzm. 
  the country inspectors face had shown his intense amazement at the rapid and masterful progress of holmess investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 at first he had shown some disposition to assert his own position  but now he was overcome with admiration and ready to follow without question wherever holmes led qzmSEPqzm. 
  whom do you suspect he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill go into that later qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are several points in this problem which i have not been able to explain to you yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 now that i have got so far i had best proceed on my own lines  and then clear the whole matter up once and for all qzmSEPqzm. 
  just as you wish  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  so long as we get our man qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have no desire to make mysteries  but it is impossible at the moment of action to enter into long and complex explanations qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have the threads of this affair all in my hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 even if this lady should never recover consciousness we can still reconstruct the events of last night and ensure that justice be done qzmSEPqzm. 
 first of all i wish to know whether there is any inn in this neighbourhood known as elriges  the servants were crossquestioned  but none of them had heard of such a place qzmSEPqzm. 
 the stableboy threw a light upon the matter by remembering that a farmer of that name lived some miles off in the direction of east ruston qzmSEPqzm. 
  is it a lonely farm  very lonely  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  perhaps they have not heard yet of all that happened here during the night  maybe not  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes thought for a little and then a curious smile played over his face qzmSEPqzm. 
  saddle a horse  my lad  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall wish you to take a note to elriges farm qzmSEPqzm. 
  he took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men qzmSEPqzm. 
 with these in front of him he worked for some time at the studytable qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally he handed a note to the boy  with directions to put it into the hands of the person to whom it was addressed  and especially to answer no questions of any sort which might be put to him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw the outside of the note  addressed in straggling  irregular characters  very unlike holmess usual precise hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was consigned to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 abe slaney  elriges farm  east ruston  norfolk qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think  inspector  holmes remarked  that you would do well to telegraph for an escort  as  if my calculations prove to be correct  you may have a particularly dangerous prisoner to convey to the county gaol qzmSEPqzm. 
 the boy who takes this note could no doubt forward your telegram qzmSEPqzm. 
 if there is an afternoon train to town  watson  i think we should do well to take it  as i have a chemical analysis of some interest to finish  and this investigation draws rapidly to a close qzmSEPqzm. 
  when the youth had been dispatched with the note  sherlock holmes gave his instructions to the servants qzmSEPqzm. 
 if any visitor were to call asking for mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt no information should be given as to her condition  but he was to be shown at once into the drawingroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 he impressed these points upon them with the utmost earnestness qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally he led the way into the drawingroom with the remark that the business was now out of our hands  and that we must while away the time as best we might until we could see what was in store for us qzmSEPqzm. 
 the doctor had departed to his patients  and only the inspector and myself remained qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think that i can help you to pass an hour in an interesting and profitable manner  said holmes  drawing his chair up to the table and spreading out in front of him the various papers upon which were recorded the antics of the dancing men qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to you  friend watson  i owe you every atonement for having allowed your natural curiosity to remain so long unsatisfied qzmSEPqzm. 
 to you  inspector  the whole incident may appeal as a remarkable professional study qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must tell you first of all the interesting circumstances connected with the previous consultations which mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt has had with me in baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 he then shortly recapitulated the facts which have already been recorded qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have here in front of me these singular productions  at which one might smile had they not proved themselves to be the forerunners of so terrible a tragedy qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am fairly familiar with all forms of secret writings  and am myself the author of a trifling monograph upon the subject  in which i analyze one hundred and sixty separate ciphers  but i confess that this is entirely new to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 the object of those who invented the system has apparently been to conceal that these characters convey a message  and to give the idea that they are the mere random sketches of children qzmSEPqzm. 
  having once recognised  however  that the symbols stood for letters  and having applied the rules which guide us in all forms of secret writings  the solution was easy enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first message submitted to me was so short that it was impossible for me to do more than to say with some confidence that the symbol xxx stood for e qzmSEPqzm. 
 as you are aware  e is the most common letter in the english alphabet  and it predominates to so marked an extent that even in a short sentence one would expect to find it most often qzmSEPqzm. 
 out of fifteen symbols in the first message four were the same  so it was reasonable to set this down as e qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is true that in some cases the figure was bearing a flag and in some cases not  but it was probable from the way in which the flags were distributed that they were used to break the sentence up into words qzmSEPqzm. 
 i accepted this as a hypothesis  and noted that e was represented by xxx qzmSEPqzm. 
  but now came the real difficulty of the inquiry qzmSEPqzm. 
 the order of the english letters after e is by no means well marked  and any preponderance which may be shown in an average of a printed sheet may be reversed in a single short sentence qzmSEPqzm. 
 speaking roughly  t  a  o  i  n  s  h  r  d  and l are the numerical order in which letters occur  but t  a  o  and i are very nearly abreast of each other  and it would be an endless task to try each combination until a meaning was arrived at qzmSEPqzm. 
 i  therefore  waited for fresh material qzmSEPqzm. 
 in my second interview with mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt he was able to give me two other short sentences and one message  which appearedsince there was no flagto be a single word qzmSEPqzm. 
 here are the symbols qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  in the single word i have already got the two es coming second and fourth in a word of five letters qzmSEPqzm. 
 it might be sever  or lever  or never qzmSEPqzm. 
 there can be no question that the latter as a reply to an appeal is far the most probable  and the circumstances pointed to its being a reply written by the lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 accepting it as correct  we are now able to say that the symbols xxx stand respectively for n  v  and r qzmSEPqzm. 
  even now i was in considerable difficulty  but a happy thought put me in possession of several other letters qzmSEPqzm. 
 it occurred to me that if these appeals came  as i expected  from someone who had been intimate with the lady in her early life  a combination which contained two es with three letters between might very well stand for the name elsie qzmSEPqzm. 
 on examination i found that such a combination formed the termination of the message which was three times repeated qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was certainly some appeal to elsie qzmSEPqzm. 
 in this way i had got my l  s  and i qzmSEPqzm. 
 but what appeal could it be there were only four letters in the word which preceded elsie  and it ended in e qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely the word must be come qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tried all other four letters ending in e  but could find none to fit the case qzmSEPqzm. 
 so now i was in possession of c  o  and m  and i was in a position to attack the first message once more  dividing it into words and putting dots for each symbol which was still unknown qzmSEPqzm. 
 so treated it worked out in this fashion          qzmSEPqzm. 
m  qzmSEPqzm. 
ere  qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmSEPqzm. 
e  sl qzmSEPqzm. 
ne qzmSEPqzm. 
  now the first letter can only be a  which is a most useful discovery  since it occurs no fewer than three times in this short sentence  and the h is also apparent in the second word qzmSEPqzm. 
 now it becomes          am  here  a qzmSEPqzm. 
e  slane qzmSEPqzm. 
  or  filling in the obvious vacancies in the name          am  here  abe  slaney qzmSEPqzm. 
  i had so many letters now that i could proceed with considerable confidence to the second message  which worked out in this fashion          a qzmSEPqzm. 
  elri qzmSEPqzm. 
es qzmSEPqzm. 
  here i could only make sense by putting t and g for the missing letters  and supposing that the name was that of some house or inn at which the writer was staying qzmSEPqzm. 
  inspector martin and i had listened with the utmost interest to the full and clear account of how my friend had produced results which had led to so complete a command over our difficulties qzmSEPqzm. 
  what did you do then  sir asked the inspector qzmSEPqzm. 
  i had every reason to suppose that this abe slaney was an american  since abe is an american contraction  and since a letter from america had been the startingpoint of all the trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had also every cause to think that there was some criminal secret in the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
 the ladys allusions to her past and her refusal to take her husband into her confidence both pointed in that direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 i therefore cabled to my friend  wilson hargreave  of the new york police bureau  who has more than once made use of my knowledge of london crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 i asked him whether the name of abe slaney was known to him qzmSEPqzm. 
 here is his reply the most dangerous crook in chicago qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the very evening upon which i had his answer hilton cubitt sent me the last message from slaney qzmSEPqzm. 
 working with known letters it took this form           elsie  qzmSEPqzm. 
re qzmSEPqzm. 
are  to  meet  thy  go qzmSEPqzm. 
  the addition of a p and a d completed a message which showed me that the rascal was proceeding from persuasion to threats  and my knowledge of the crooks of chicago prepared me to find that he might very rapidly put his words into action qzmSEPqzm. 
 i at once came to norfolk with my friend and colleague  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  but  unhappily  only in time to find that the worst had already occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of a case   said the inspector  warmly qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will excuse me  however  if i speak frankly to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are only answerable to yourself  but i have to answer to my superiors qzmSEPqzm. 
 if this abe slaney  living at elriges  is indeed the murderer  and if he has made his escape while i am seated here  i should certainly get into serious trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
  you need not be uneasy qzmSEPqzm. 
 he will not try to escape qzmSEPqzm. 
  how do you know  to fly would be a confession of guilt qzmSEPqzm. 
  then let us go to arrest him qzmSEPqzm. 
  i expect him here every instant qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why should he come  because i have written and asked him qzmSEPqzm. 
  but this is incredible  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes why should he come because you have asked him would not such a request rather rouse his suspicions and cause him to fly  i think i have known how to frame the letter  said sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 in fact  if i am not very much mistaken  here is the gentleman himself coming up the drive qzmSEPqzm. 
  a man was striding up the path which led to the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a tall  handsome  swarthy fellow  clad in a suit of grey flannel  with a panama hat  a bristling black beard  and a great  aggressive hooked nose  and flourishing a cane as he walked qzmSEPqzm. 
 he swaggered up the path as if the place belonged to him  and we heard his loud  confident peal at the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think  gentlemen  said holmes  quietly  that we had best take up our position behind the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 every precaution is necessary when dealing with such a fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will need your handcuffs  inspector qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can leave the talking to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  we waited in silence for a minuteone of those minutes which one can never forget qzmSEPqzm. 
 then the door opened and the man stepped in qzmSEPqzm. 
 in an instant holmes clapped a pistol to his head and martin slipped the handcuffs over his wrists qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was all done so swiftly and deftly that the fellow was helpless before he knew that he was attacked qzmSEPqzm. 
 he glared from one to the other of us with a pair of blazing black eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he burst into a bitter laugh qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  gentlemen  you have the drop on me this time qzmSEPqzm. 
 i seem to have knocked up against something hard qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i came here in answer to a letter from mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt qzmSEPqzm. 
 dont tell me that she is in this dont tell me that she helped to set a trap for me  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt was seriously injured and is at deaths door qzmSEPqzm. 
  the man gave a hoarse cry of grief which rang through the house qzmSEPqzm. 
  youre crazy he cried  fiercely qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was he that was hurt  not she qzmSEPqzm. 
 who would have hurt little elsie i may have threatened her  god forgive me  but i would not have touched a hair of her pretty head qzmSEPqzm. 
 take it backyou say that she is not hurt  she was found badly wounded by the side of her dead husband qzmSEPqzm. 
  he sank with a deep groan on to the settee and buried his face in his manacled hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 for five minutes he was silent qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he raised his face once more  and spoke with the cold composure of despair qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have nothing to hide from you  gentlemen  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 if i shot the man he had his shot at me  and theres no murder in that qzmSEPqzm. 
 but if you think i could have hurt that woman  then you dont know either me or her qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tell you there was never a man in this world loved a woman more than i loved her qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had a right to her qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was pledged to me years ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 who was this englishman that he should come between us i tell you that i had the first right to her  and that i was only claiming my own qzmSEPqzm. 
  she broke away from your influence when she found the man that you are  said holmes  sternly qzmSEPqzm. 
 she fled from america to avoid you  and she married an honourable gentleman in england qzmSEPqzm. 
 you dogged her and followed her and made her life a misery to her in order to induce her to abandon the husband whom she loved and respected in order to fly with you  whom she feared and hated qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have ended by bringing about the death of a noble man and driving his wife to suicide qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is your record in this business  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 abe slaney  and you will answer for it to the law qzmSEPqzm. 
  if elsie dies i care nothing what becomes of me  said the american qzmSEPqzm. 
 he opened one of his hands and looked at a note crumpled up in his palm qzmSEPqzm. 
 see here  mister  he cried  with a gleam of suspicion in his eyes  youre not trying to scare me over this  are you if the lady is hurt as bad as you say  who was it that wrote this note he tossed it forwards on to the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  i wrote it to bring you here qzmSEPqzm. 
  you wrote it there was no one on earth outside the joint who knew the secret of the dancing men qzmSEPqzm. 
 how came you to write it  what one man can invent another can discover  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a cab coming to convey you to norwich  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 slaney qzmSEPqzm. 
 but  meanwhile  you have time to make some small reparation for the injury you have wrought qzmSEPqzm. 
 are you aware that mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt has herself lain under grave suspicion of the murder of her husband  and that it was only my presence here and the knowledge which i happened to possess which has saved her from the accusation the least that you owe her is to make it clear to the whole world that she was in no way  directly or indirectly  responsible for his tragic end qzmSEPqzm. 
  i ask nothing better  said the american qzmSEPqzm. 
 i guess the very best case i can make for myself is the absolute naked truth qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is my duty to warn you that it will be used against you  cried the inspector  with the magnificent fairplay of the british criminal law qzmSEPqzm. 
  slaney shrugged his shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill chance that  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 first of all  i want you gentlemen to understand that i have known this lady since she was a child qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were seven of us in a gang in chicago  and elsies father was the boss of the joint qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a clever man  was old patrick qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was he who invented that writing  which would pass as a childs scrawl unless you just happened to have the key to it qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  elsie learned some of our ways  but she couldnt stand the business  and she had a bit of honest money of her own  so she gave us all the slip and got away to london qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had been engaged to me  and she would have married me  i believe  if i had taken over another profession  but she would have nothing to do with anything on the cross qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was only after her marriage to this englishman that i was able to find out where she was qzmSEPqzm. 
 i wrote to her  but got no answer qzmSEPqzm. 
 after that i came over  and  as letters were no use  i put my messages where she could read them qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i have been here a month now qzmSEPqzm. 
 i lived in that farm  where i had a room down below  and could get in and out every night  and no one the wiser qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tried all i could to coax elsie away qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew that she read the messages  for once she wrote an answer under one of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 then my temper got the better of me  and i began to threaten her qzmSEPqzm. 
 she sent me a letter then  imploring me to go away and saying that it would break her heart if any scandal should come upon her husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 she said that she would come down when her husband was asleep at three in the morning  and speak with me through the end window  if i would go away afterwards and leave her in peace qzmSEPqzm. 
 she came down and brought money with her  trying to bribe me to go qzmSEPqzm. 
 this made me mad  and i caught her arm and tried to pull her through the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 at that moment in rushed the husband with his revolver in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 elsie had sunk down upon the floor  and we were face to face qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was heeled also  and i held up my gun to scare him off and let me get away qzmSEPqzm. 
 he fired and missed me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i pulled off almost at the same instant  and down he dropped qzmSEPqzm. 
 i made away across the garden  and as i went i heard the window shut behind me qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats gods truth  gentlemen  every word of it  and i heard no more about it until that lad came riding up with a note which made me walk in here  like a jay  and give myself into your hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  a cab had driven up whilst the american had been talking qzmSEPqzm. 
 two uniformed policemen sat inside qzmSEPqzm. 
 inspector martin rose and touched his prisoner on the shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is time for us to go qzmSEPqzm. 
  can i see her first  no  she is not conscious qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  i only hope that if ever again i have an important case i shall have the good fortune to have you by my side qzmSEPqzm. 
  we stood at the window and watched the cab drive away qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i turned back my eye caught the pellet of paper which the prisoner had tossed upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the note with which holmes had decoyed him qzmSEPqzm. 
  see if you can read it  watson  said he  with a smile qzmSEPqzm. 
  it contained no word  but this little line of dancing men  graphic  if you use the code which i have explained  said holmes  you will find that it simply means come here at once qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was convinced that it was an invitation which he would not refuse  since he could never imagine that it could come from anyone but the lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 and so  my dear watson  we have ended by turning the dancing men to good when they have so often been the agents of evil  and i think that i have fulfilled my promise of giving you something unusual for your notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 threeforty is our train  and i fancy we should be back in baker street for dinner qzmSEPqzm. 
   only one word of epilogue qzmSEPqzm. 
 the american  abe slaney  was condemned to death at the winter assizes at norwich  but his penalty was changed to penal servitude in consideration of mitigating circumstances  and the certainty that hilton cubitt had fired the first shot qzmSEPqzm. 
 of mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton cubitt i only know that i have heard she recovered entirely  and that she still remains a widow  devoting her whole life to the care of the poor and to the administration of her husbands estate qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the solitary cyclist qzmSEPqzm. 
   from the years  qzmNUMqzm  to  qzmNUMqzm  inclusive mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes was a very busy man qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is safe to say that there was no public case of any difficulty in which he was not consulted during those eight years  and there were hundreds of private cases  some of them of the most intricate and extraordinary character  in which he played a prominent part qzmSEPqzm. 
 many startling successes and a few unavoidable failures were the outcome of this long period of continuous work qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i have preserved very full notes of all these cases  and was myself personally engaged in many of them  it may be imagined that it is no easy task to know which i should select to lay before the public qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall  however  preserve my former rule  and give the preference to those cases which derive their interest not so much from the brutality of the crime as from the ingenuity and dramatic quality of the solution qzmSEPqzm. 
 for this reason i will now lay before the reader the facts connected with miss violet smith  the solitary cyclist of charlington  and the curious sequel of our investigation  which culminated in unexpected tragedy qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is true that the circumstances did not admit of any striking illustration of those powers for which my friend was famous  but there were some points about the case which made it stand out in those long records of crime from which i gather the material for these little narratives qzmSEPqzm. 
  on referring to my notebook for the year  qzmNUMqzm  i find that it was upon saturday  the  qzmNUMqzm rd of april  that we first heard of miss violet smith qzmSEPqzm. 
 her visit was  i remember  extremely unwelcome to holmes  for he was immersed at the moment in a very abstruse and complicated problem concerning the peculiar persecution to which john vincent harden  the wellknown tobacco millionaire  had been subjected qzmSEPqzm. 
 my friend  who loved above all things precision and concentration of thought  resented anything which distracted his attention from the matter in hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet without a harshness which was foreign to his nature it was impossible to refuse to listen to the story of the young and beautiful woman  tall  graceful  and queenly  who presented herself at baker street late in the evening and implored his assistance and advice qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was vain to urge that his time was already fully occupied  for the young lady had come with the determination to tell her story  and it was evident that nothing short of force could get her out of the room until she had done so qzmSEPqzm. 
 with a resigned air and a somewhat weary smile  holmes begged the beautiful intruder to take a seat and to inform us what it was that was troubling her qzmSEPqzm. 
  at least it cannot be your health  said he  as his keen eyes darted over her  so ardent a bicyclist must be full of energy qzmSEPqzm. 
  she glanced down in surprise at her own feet  and i observed the slight roughening of the side of the sole caused by the friction of the edge of the pedal qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  i bicycle a good deal  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and that has something to do with my visit to you today qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend took the ladys ungloved hand and examined it with as close an attention and as little sentiment as a scientist would show to a specimen qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will excuse me  i am sure qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is my business  said he  as he dropped it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i nearly fell into the error of supposing that you were typewriting qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  it is obvious that it is music qzmSEPqzm. 
 you observe the spatulate fingerend  watson  which is common to both professions there is a spirituality about the face  howeverhe gently turned it towards the lightwhich the typewriter does not generate qzmSEPqzm. 
 this lady is a musician qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i teach music qzmSEPqzm. 
  in the country  i presume  from your complexion qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  near farnham  on the borders of surrey qzmSEPqzm. 
  a beautiful neighbourhood and full of the most interesting associations qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember  watson  that it was near there that we took archie stamford  the forger qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  miss violet  what has happened to you near farnham  on the borders of surrey  the young lady  with great clearness and composure  made the following curious statement  my father is dead  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was james smith  who conducted the orchestra at the old imperial theatre qzmSEPqzm. 
 my mother and i were left without a relation in the world except one uncle  ralph smith  who went to africa twentyfive years ago  and we have never had a word from him since qzmSEPqzm. 
 when father died we were left very poor  but one day we were told that there was an advertisement in the times inquiring for our whereabouts qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can imagine how excited we were  for we thought that someone had left us a fortune qzmSEPqzm. 
 we went at once to the lawyer whose name was given in the paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 there we met two gentlemen  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers and mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley  who were home on a visit from south africa qzmSEPqzm. 
 they said that my uncle was a friend of theirs  that he died some months before in great poverty in johannesburg  and that he had asked them with his last breath to hunt up his relations and see that they were in no want qzmSEPqzm. 
 it seemed strange to us that uncle ralph  who took no notice of us when he was alive  should be so careful to look after us when he was dead  but mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers explained that the reason was that my uncle had just heard of the death of his brother  and so felt responsible for our fate qzmSEPqzm. 
  excuse me  said holmes  when was this interview  last decemberfour months ago qzmSEPqzm. 
  pray proceed qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley seemed to me to be a most odious person qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was for ever making eyes at mea coarse  puffyfaced  redmoustached young man  with his hair plastered down on each side of his forehead qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought that he was perfectly hatefuland i was sure that cyril would not wish me to know such a person qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  cyril is his name said holmes  smiling qzmSEPqzm. 
  the young lady blushed and laughed qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  cyril morton  an electrical engineer  and we hope to be married at the end of the summer qzmSEPqzm. 
 dear me  how did i get talking about him what i wished to say was that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley was perfectly odious  but that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  who was a much older man  was more agreeable qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a dark  sallow  cleanshaven  silent person  but he had polite manners and a pleasant smile qzmSEPqzm. 
 he inquired how we were left  and on finding that we were very poor he suggested that i should come and teach music to his only daughter  aged ten qzmSEPqzm. 
 i said that i did not like to leave my mother  on which he suggested that i should go home to her every weekend  and he offered me a hundred a year  which was certainly splendid pay qzmSEPqzm. 
 so it ended by my accepting  and i went down to chiltern grange  about six miles from farnham qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers was a widower  but he had engaged a ladyhousekeeper  a very respectable  elderly person  called mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 dixon  to look after his establishment qzmSEPqzm. 
 the child was a dear  and everything promised well qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers was very kind and very musical  and we had most pleasant evenings together qzmSEPqzm. 
 every weekend i went home to my mother in town qzmSEPqzm. 
  the first flaw in my happiness was the arrival of the redmoustached mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley qzmSEPqzm. 
 he came for a visit of a week  and oh  it seemed three months to me he was a dreadful person  a bully to everyone else  but to me something infinitely worse qzmSEPqzm. 
 he made odious love to me  boasted of his wealth  said that if i married him i would have the finest diamonds in london  and finally  when i would have nothing to do with him  he seized me in his arms one day after dinnerhe was hideously strongand he swore that he would not let me go until i had kissed him qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers came in and tore him off from me  on which he turned upon his own host  knocking him down and cutting his face open qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was the end of his visit  as you can imagine qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers apologized to me next day  and assured me that i should never be exposed to such an insult again qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have not seen mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley since qzmSEPqzm. 
  and now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i come at last to the special thing which has caused me to ask your advice today qzmSEPqzm. 
 you must know that every saturday forenoon i ride on my bicycle to farnham station in order to get the  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmNUMqzm  to town qzmSEPqzm. 
 the road from chiltern grange is a lonely one  and at one spot it is particularly so  for it lies for over a mile between charlington heath upon one side and the woods which lie round charlington hall upon the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 you could not find a more lonely tract of road anywhere  and it is quite rare to meet so much as a cart  or a peasant  until you reach the high road near crooksbury hill qzmSEPqzm. 
 two weeks ago i was passing this place when i chanced to look back over my shoulder  and about two hundred yards behind me i saw a man  also on a bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seemed to be a middleaged man  with a short  dark beard qzmSEPqzm. 
 i looked back before i reached farnham  but the man was gone  so i thought no more about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 but you can imagine how surprised i was  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  when on my return on the monday i saw the same man on the same stretch of road qzmSEPqzm. 
 my astonishment was increased when the incident occurred again  exactly as before  on the following saturday and monday qzmSEPqzm. 
 he always kept his distance and did not molest me in any way  but still it certainly was very odd qzmSEPqzm. 
 i mentioned it to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  who seemed interested in what i said  and told me that he had ordered a horse and trap  so that in future i should not pass over these lonely roads without some companion qzmSEPqzm. 
  the horse and trap were to have come this week  but for some reason they were not delivered  and again i had to cycle to the station qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can think that i looked out when i came to charlington heath  and there  sure enough  was the man  exactly as he had been the two weeks before qzmSEPqzm. 
 he always kept so far from me that i could not clearly see his face  but it was certainly someone whom i did not know qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was dressed in a dark suit with a cloth cap qzmSEPqzm. 
 the only thing about his face that i could clearly see was his dark beard qzmSEPqzm. 
 today i was not alarmed  but i was filled with curiosity  and i determined to find out who he was and what he wanted qzmSEPqzm. 
 i slowed down my machine  but he slowed down his qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i stopped altogether  but he stopped also qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i laid a trap for him qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a sharp turning of the road  and i pedalled very quickly round this  and then i stopped and waited qzmSEPqzm. 
 i expected him to shoot round and pass me before he could stop qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he never appeared qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i went back and looked round the corner qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could see a mile of road  but he was not on it qzmSEPqzm. 
 to make it the more extraordinary  there was no side road at this point down which he could have gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 this case certainly presents some features of its own  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 how much time elapsed between your turning the corner and your discovery that the road was clear  two or three minutes qzmSEPqzm. 
  then he could not have retreated down the road  and you say that there are no side roads  none qzmSEPqzm. 
  then he certainly took a footpath on one side or the other qzmSEPqzm. 
  it could not have been on the side of the heath or i should have seen him qzmSEPqzm. 
  so by the process of exclusion we arrive at the fact that he made his way towards charlington hall  which  as i understand  is situated in its own grounds on one side of the road qzmSEPqzm. 
 anything else  nothing  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  save that i was so perplexed that i felt i should not be happy until i had seen you and had your advice qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes sat in silence for some little time qzmSEPqzm. 
  where is the gentleman to whom you are engaged he asked  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
  he is in the midland electrical company  at coventry qzmSEPqzm. 
  he would not pay you a surprise visit  oh  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes as if i should not know him  have you had any other admirers  several before i knew cyril qzmSEPqzm. 
  and since  there was this dreadful man  woodley  if you can call him an admirer qzmSEPqzm. 
  no one else  our fair client seemed a little confused qzmSEPqzm. 
  who was he asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  it may be a mere fancy of mine  but it has seemed to me sometimes that my employer  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  takes a great deal of interest in me qzmSEPqzm. 
 we are thrown rather together qzmSEPqzm. 
 i play his accompaniments in the evening qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has never said anything qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a perfect gentleman qzmSEPqzm. 
 but a girl always knows qzmSEPqzm. 
  ha holmes looked grave qzmSEPqzm. 
 what does he do for a living  he is a rich man qzmSEPqzm. 
  no carriages or horses  well  at least he is fairly welltodo qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he goes into the city two or three times a week qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is deeply interested in south african gold shares qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will let me know any fresh development  miss smith qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am very busy just now  but i will find time to make some inquiries into your case qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the meantime take no step without letting me know qzmSEPqzm. 
 goodbye  and i trust that we shall have nothing but good news from you qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is part of the settled order of nature that such a girl should have followers  said holmes  as he pulled at his meditative pipe  but for choice not on bicycles in lonely country roads qzmSEPqzm. 
 some secretive lover  beyond all doubt qzmSEPqzm. 
 but there are curious and suggestive details about the case  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  that he should appear only at that point  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 our first effort must be to find who are the tenants of charlington hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  again  how about the connection between carruthers and woodley  since they appear to be men of such a different type how came they both to be so keen upon looking up ralph smiths relations one more point qzmSEPqzm. 
 what sort of a menage is it which pays double the market price for a governess  but does not keep a horse although six miles from the station odd  watsonvery odd  you will go down  no  my dear fellow  you will go down qzmSEPqzm. 
 this may be some trifling intrigue  and i cannot break my other important research for the sake of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 on monday you will arrive early at farnham  you will conceal yourself near charlington heath  you will observe these facts for yourself  and act as your own judgment advises qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  having inquired as to the occupants of the hall  you will come back to me and report qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  watson  not another word of the matter until we have a few solid steppingstones on which we may hope to get across to our solution qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had ascertained from the lady that she went down upon the monday by the train which leaves waterloo at  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmNUMqzm   so i started early and caught the  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 at farnham station i had no difficulty in being directed to charlington heath qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was impossible to mistake the scene of the young ladys adventure  for the road runs between the open heath on one side and an old yew hedge upon the other  surrounding a park which is studded with magnificent trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a main gateway of lichenstudded stone  each side pillar surmounted by mouldering heraldic emblems  but besides this central carriage drive i observed several points where there were gaps in the hedge and paths leading through them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the house was invisible from the road  but the surroundings all spoke of gloom and decay qzmSEPqzm. 
  the heath was covered with golden patches of flowering gorse  gleaming magnificently in the light of the bright spring sunshine qzmSEPqzm. 
 behind one of these clumps i took up my position  so as to command both the gateway of the hall and a long stretch of the road upon either side qzmSEPqzm. 
 it had been deserted when i left it  but now i saw a cyclist riding down it from the opposite direction to that in which i had come qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was clad in a dark suit  and i saw that he had a black beard qzmSEPqzm. 
 on reaching the end of the charlington grounds he sprang from his machine and led it through a gap in the hedge  disappearing from my view qzmSEPqzm. 
  a quarter of an hour passed and then a second cyclist appeared qzmSEPqzm. 
 this time it was the young lady coming from the station qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw her look about her as she came to the charlington hedge qzmSEPqzm. 
 an instant later the man emerged from his hidingplace  sprang upon his cycle  and followed her qzmSEPqzm. 
 in all the broad landscape those were the only moving figures  the graceful girl sitting very straight upon her machine  and the man behind her bending low over his handlebar  with a curiously furtive suggestion in every movement qzmSEPqzm. 
 she looked back at him and slowed her pace qzmSEPqzm. 
 he slowed also qzmSEPqzm. 
 she stopped qzmSEPqzm. 
 he at once stopped too  keeping two hundred yards behind her qzmSEPqzm. 
 her next movement was as unexpected as it was spirited qzmSEPqzm. 
 she suddenly whisked her wheels round and dashed straight at him he was as quick as she  however  and darted off in desperate flight qzmSEPqzm. 
 presently she came back up the road again  her head haughtily in the air  not deigning to take any further notice of her silent attendant qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had turned also  and still kept his distance until the curve of the road hid them from my sight qzmSEPqzm. 
  i remained in my hidingplace  and it was well that i did so  for presently the man reappeared cycling slowly back qzmSEPqzm. 
 he turned in at the hall gates and dismounted from his machine qzmSEPqzm. 
 for some few minutes i could see him standing among the trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 his hands were raised and he seemed to be settling his necktie qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he mounted his cycle and rode away from me down the drive towards the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 i ran across the heath and peered through the trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 far away i could catch glimpses of the old grey building with its bristling tudor chimneys  but the drive ran through a dense shrubbery  and i saw no more of my man qzmSEPqzm. 
  however  it seemed to me that i had done a fairly good mornings work  and i walked back in high spirits to farnham qzmSEPqzm. 
 the local houseagent could tell me nothing about charlington hall  and referred me to a wellknown firm in pall mall qzmSEPqzm. 
 there i halted on my way home  and met with courtesy from the representative qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i could not have charlington hall for the summer qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was just too late qzmSEPqzm. 
 it had been let about a month ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamson was the name of the tenant qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a respectable elderly gentleman qzmSEPqzm. 
 the polite agent was afraid he could say no more  as the affairs of his clients were not matters which he could discuss qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes listened with attention to the long report which i was able to present to him that evening  but it did not elicit that word of curt praise which i had hoped for and should have valued qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the contrary  his austere face was even more severe than usual as he commented upon the things that i had done and the things that i had not qzmSEPqzm. 
  your hidingplace  my dear watson  was very faulty qzmSEPqzm. 
 you should have been behind the hedge  then you would have had a close view of this interesting person qzmSEPqzm. 
 as it is you were some hundreds of yards away  and can tell me even less than miss smith qzmSEPqzm. 
 she thinks she does not know the man  i am convinced she does qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  otherwise  should he be so desperately anxious that she should not get so near him as to see his features you describe him as bending over the handlebar qzmSEPqzm. 
 concealment again  you see qzmSEPqzm. 
 you really have done remarkably badly qzmSEPqzm. 
 he returns to the house and you want to find out who he is qzmSEPqzm. 
 you come to a london houseagent  what should i have done i cried  with some heat qzmSEPqzm. 
  gone to the nearest publichouse qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is the centre of country gossip qzmSEPqzm. 
 they would have told you every name  from the master to the scullerymaid qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamson it conveys nothing to my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 if he is an elderly man he is not this active cyclist who sprints away from that athletic young ladys pursuit qzmSEPqzm. 
 what have we gained by your expedition the knowledge that the girls story is true qzmSEPqzm. 
 i never doubted it qzmSEPqzm. 
 that there is a connection between the cyclist and the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 i never doubted that either qzmSEPqzm. 
 that the hall is tenanted by williamson qzmSEPqzm. 
 whos the better for that well  well  my dear sir  dont look so depressed qzmSEPqzm. 
 we can do little more until next saturday  and in the meantime i may make one or two inquiries myself qzmSEPqzm. 
  next morning we had a note from miss smith  recounting shortly and accurately the very incidents which i had seen  but the pith of the letter lay in the postscript  i am sure that you will respect my confidence  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  when i tell you that my place here has become difficult owing to the fact that my employer has proposed marriage to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am convinced that his feelings are most deep and most honourable qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time my promise is  of course  given qzmSEPqzm. 
 he took my refusal very seriously  but also very gently qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can understand  however  that the situation is a little strained qzmSEPqzm. 
  our young friend seems to be getting into deep waters  said holmes  thoughtfully  as he finished the letter qzmSEPqzm. 
 the case certainly presents more features of interest and more possibility of development than i had originally thought qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should be none the worse for a quiet  peaceful day in the country  and i am inclined to run down this afternoon and test one or two theories which i have formed qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmess quiet day in the country had a singular termination  for he arrived at baker street late in the evening with a cut lip and a discoloured lump upon his forehead  besides a general air of dissipation which would have made his own person the fitting object of a scotland yard investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was immensely tickled by his own adventures  and laughed heartily as he recounted them qzmSEPqzm. 
  i get so little active exercise that it is always a treat  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are aware that i have some proficiency in the good old british sport of boxing qzmSEPqzm. 
 occasionally it is of service qzmSEPqzm. 
 today  for example  i should have come to very ignominious grief without it qzmSEPqzm. 
  i begged him to tell me what had occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
  i found that country pub which i had already recommended to your notice  and there i made my discreet inquiries qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was in the bar  and a garrulous landlord was giving me all that i wanted qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamson is a whitebearded man  and he lives alone with a small staff of servants at the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is some rumour that he is or has been a clergyman  but one or two incidents of his short residence at the hall struck me as peculiarly unecclesiastical qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have already made some inquiries at a clerical agency  and they tell me that there was a man of that name in orders whose career has been a singularly dark one qzmSEPqzm. 
 the landlord further informed me that there are usually weekend visitorsa warm lot  sirat the hall  and especially one gentleman with a red moustache  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley by name  who was always there qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had got as far as this when who should walk in but the gentleman himself  who had been drinking his beer in the taproom and had heard the whole conversation qzmSEPqzm. 
 who was i what did i want what did i mean by asking questions he had a fine flow of language  and his adjectives were very vigorous qzmSEPqzm. 
 he ended a string of abuse by a vicious backhander which i failed to entirely avoid qzmSEPqzm. 
 the next few minutes were delicious qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a straight left against a slogging ruffian qzmSEPqzm. 
 i emerged as you see me qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley went home in a cart qzmSEPqzm. 
 so ended my country trip  and it must be confessed that  however enjoyable  my day on the surrey border has not been much more profitable than your own qzmSEPqzm. 
  the thursday brought us another letter from our client qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will not be surprised  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said she  to hear that i am leaving mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carrutherss employment qzmSEPqzm. 
 even the high pay cannot reconcile me to the discomforts of my situation qzmSEPqzm. 
 on saturday i come up to town and i do not intend to return qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers has got a trap  and so the dangers of the lonely road  if there ever were any dangers  are now over qzmSEPqzm. 
  as to the special cause of my leaving  it is not merely the strained situation with mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  but it is the reappearance of that odious man  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was always hideous  but he looks more awful than ever now  for he appears to have had an accident and he is much disfigured qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw him out of the window  but i am glad to say i did not meet him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had a long talk with mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  who seemed much excited afterwards qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley must be staying in the neighbourhood  for he did not sleep here  and yet i caught a glimpse of him again this morning slinking about in the shrubbery qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would sooner have a savage wild animal loose about the place qzmSEPqzm. 
 i loathe and fear him more than i can say qzmSEPqzm. 
 how can mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers endure such a creature for a moment however  all my troubles will be over on saturday qzmSEPqzm. 
  so i trust  watson  so i trust  said holmes  gravely qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is some deep intrigue going on round that little woman  and it is our duty to see that no one molests her upon that last journey qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  watson  that we must spare time to run down together on saturday morning  and make sure that this curious and inconclusive investigation has no untoward ending qzmSEPqzm. 
  i confess that i had not up to now taken a very serious view of the case  which had seemed to me rather grotesque and bizarre than dangerous qzmSEPqzm. 
 that a man should lie in wait for and follow a very handsome woman is no unheardof thing  and if he had so little audacity that he not only dared not address her  but even fled from her approach  he was not a very formidable assailant qzmSEPqzm. 
 the ruffian woodley was a very different person  but  except on one occasion  he had not molested our client  and now he visited the house of carruthers without intruding upon her presence qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man on the bicycle was doubtless a member of those weekend parties at the hall of which the publican had spoken  but who he was or what he wanted was as obscure as ever qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the severity of holmess manner and the fact that he slipped a revolver into his pocket before leaving our rooms which impressed me with the feeling that tragedy might prove to lurk behind this curious train of events qzmSEPqzm. 
  a rainy night had been followed by a glorious morning  and the heathcovered countryside with the glowing clumps of flowering gorse seemed all the more beautiful to eyes which were weary of the duns and drabs and slategreys of london qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes and i walked along the broad  sandy road inhaling the fresh morning air  and rejoicing in the music of the birds and the fresh breath of the spring qzmSEPqzm. 
 from a rise of the road on the shoulder of crooksbury hill we could see the grim hall bristling out from amidst the ancient oaks  which  old as they were  were still younger than the building which they surrounded qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes pointed down the long tract of road which wound  a reddish yellow band  between the brown of the heath and the budding green of the woods qzmSEPqzm. 
 far away  a black dot  we could see a vehicle moving in our direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes gave an exclamation of impatience qzmSEPqzm. 
  i had given a margin of half an hour  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 if that is her trap she must be making for the earlier train qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fear  watson  that she will be past charlington before we can possibly meet her qzmSEPqzm. 
  from the instant that we passed the rise we could no longer see the vehicle  but we hastened onwards at such a pace that my sedentary life began to tell upon me  and i was compelled to fall behind qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  however  was always in training  for he had inexhaustible stores of nervous energy upon which to draw qzmSEPqzm. 
 his springy step never slowed until suddenly  when he was a hundred yards in front of me  he halted  and i saw him throw up his hand with a gesture of grief and despair qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same instant an empty dogcart  the horse cantering  the reins trailing  appeared round the curve of the road and rattled swiftly towards us qzmSEPqzm. 
  too late  watson  too late cried holmes  as i ran panting to his side qzmSEPqzm. 
 fool that i was not to allow for that earlier train its abduction  watsonabduction murder heaven knows what block the road stop the horse thats right qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  jump in  and let us see if i can repair the consequences of my own blunder qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had sprung into the dogcart  and holmes  after turning the horse  gave it a sharp cut with the whip  and we flew back along the road qzmSEPqzm. 
 as we turned the curve the whole stretch of road between the hall and the heath was opened up qzmSEPqzm. 
 i grasped holmess arm qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats the man i gasped qzmSEPqzm. 
  a solitary cyclist was coming towards us qzmSEPqzm. 
 his head was down and his shoulders rounded as he put every ounce of energy that he possessed on to the pedals qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was flying like a racer qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly he raised his bearded face  saw us close to him  and pulled up  springing from his machine qzmSEPqzm. 
 that coalblack beard was in singular contrast to the pallor of his face  and his eyes were as bright as if he had a fever qzmSEPqzm. 
 he stared at us and at the dogcart qzmSEPqzm. 
 then a look of amazement came over his face qzmSEPqzm. 
  halloa stop there he shouted  holding his bicycle to block our road qzmSEPqzm. 
 where did you get that dogcart pull up  man he yelled  drawing a pistol from his side pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 pull up  i say  or  by george  ill put a bullet into your horse qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes threw the reins into my lap and sprang down from the cart qzmSEPqzm. 
  youre the man we want to see qzmSEPqzm. 
 where is miss violet smith he said  in his quick  clear way qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats what i am asking you qzmSEPqzm. 
 youre in her dogcart qzmSEPqzm. 
 you ought to know where she is qzmSEPqzm. 
  we met the dogcart on the road qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no one in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 we drove back to help the young lady qzmSEPqzm. 
  good lord good lord what shall i do cried the stranger  in an ecstasy of despair qzmSEPqzm. 
 theyve got her  that hellhound woodley and the blackguard parson qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  man  come  if you really are her friend qzmSEPqzm. 
 stand by me and well save her  if i have to leave my carcass in charlington wood qzmSEPqzm. 
  he ran distractedly  his pistol in his hand  towards a gap in the hedge qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes followed him  and i  leaving the horse grazing beside the road  followed holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is where they came through  said he  pointing to the marks of several feet upon the muddy path qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa stop a minute whos this in the bush  it was a young fellow about seventeen  dressed like an ostler  with leather cords and gaiters qzmSEPqzm. 
 he lay upon his back  his knees drawn up  a terrible cut upon his head qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was insensible  but alive qzmSEPqzm. 
 a glance at his wound told me that it had not penetrated the bone qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats peter  the groom  cried the stranger qzmSEPqzm. 
 he drove her qzmSEPqzm. 
 the beasts have pulled him off and clubbed him qzmSEPqzm. 
 let him lie  we cant do him any good  but we may save her from the worst fate that can befall a woman qzmSEPqzm. 
  we ran frantically down the path  which wound among the trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had reached the shrubbery which surrounded the house when holmes pulled up qzmSEPqzm. 
  they didnt go to the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 here are their marks on the lefthere  beside the laurel bushes ah  i said so  as he spoke a womans shrill screama scream which vibrated with a frenzy of horrorburst from the thick green clump of bushes in front of us qzmSEPqzm. 
 it ended suddenly on its highest note with a choke and a gurgle qzmSEPqzm. 
  this way this way they are in the bowling alley  cried the stranger  darting through the bushes qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah  the cowardly dogs follow me  gentlemen too late too late by the living jingo  we had broken suddenly into a lovely glade of greensward surrounded by ancient trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the farther side of it  under the shadow of a mighty oak  there stood a singular group of three people qzmSEPqzm. 
 one was a woman  our client  drooping and faint  a handkerchief round her mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 opposite her stood a brutal  heavyfaced  redmoustached young man  his gaitered legs parted wide  one arm akimbo  the other waving a ridingcrop  his whole attitude suggestive of triumphant bravado qzmSEPqzm. 
 between them an elderly  greybearded man  wearing a short surplice over a light tweed suit  had evidently just completed the wedding service  for he pocketed his prayerbook as we appeared and slapped the sinister bridegroom upon the back in jovial congratulation qzmSEPqzm. 
  theyre married i gasped qzmSEPqzm. 
  come on cried our guide  come on he rushed across the glade  holmes and i at his heels qzmSEPqzm. 
 as we approached  the lady staggered against the trunk of the tree for support qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamson  the exclergyman  bowed to us with mock politeness  and the bully woodley advanced with a shout of brutal and exultant laughter qzmSEPqzm. 
  you can take your beard off  bob  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know you right enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  you and your pals have just come in time for me to be able to introduce you to mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 woodley qzmSEPqzm. 
  our guides answer was a singular one qzmSEPqzm. 
 he snatched off the dark beard which had disguised him and threw it on the ground  disclosing a long  sallow  cleanshaven face below it qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he raised his revolver and covered the young ruffian  who was advancing upon him with his dangerous ridingcrop swinging in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  said our ally  i am bob carruthers  and ill see this woman righted if i have to swing for it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i told you what id do if you molested her  and  by the lord  ill be as good as my word  youre too late qzmSEPqzm. 
 shes my wife  no  shes your widow qzmSEPqzm. 
  his revolver cracked  and i saw the blood spurt from the front of woodleys waistcoat qzmSEPqzm. 
 he spun round with a scream and fell upon his back  his hideous red face turning suddenly to a dreadful mottled pallor qzmSEPqzm. 
 the old man  still clad in his surplice  burst into such a string of foul oaths as i have never heard  and pulled out a revolver of his own  but before he could raise it he was looking down the barrel of holmess weapon qzmSEPqzm. 
  enough of this  said my friend  coldly qzmSEPqzm. 
 drop that pistol watson  pick it up hold it to his head thank you qzmSEPqzm. 
 you  carruthers  give me that revolver qzmSEPqzm. 
 well have no more violence qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  hand it over  who are you  then  my name is sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  good lord  you have heard of me  i see qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will represent the official police until their arrival qzmSEPqzm. 
 here  you he shouted to a frightened groom who had appeared at the edge of the glade qzmSEPqzm. 
 come here qzmSEPqzm. 
 take this note as hard as you can ride to farnham qzmSEPqzm. 
 he scribbled a few words upon a leaf from his notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 give it to the superintendent at the policestation qzmSEPqzm. 
 until he comes i must detain you all under my personal custody qzmSEPqzm. 
  the strong  masterful personality of holmes dominated the tragic scene  and all were equally puppets in his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamson and carruthers found themselves carrying the wounded woodley into the house  and i gave my arm to the frightened girl qzmSEPqzm. 
 the injured man was laid on his bed  and at holmess request i examined him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i carried my report to where he sat in the old tapestryhung diningroom with his two prisoners before him qzmSEPqzm. 
  he will live  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
  what cried carruthers  springing out of his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill go upstairs and finish him first qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you tell me that that girl  that angel  is to be tied to roaring jack woodley for life  you need not concern yourself about that  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are two very good reasons why she should under no circumstances be his wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the first place  we are very safe in questioning mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamsons right to solemnize a marriage qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have been ordained  cried the old rascal qzmSEPqzm. 
  and also unfrocked qzmSEPqzm. 
  once a clergyman  always a clergyman qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think not qzmSEPqzm. 
 how about the license  we had a license for the marriage qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have it here in my pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  then you got it by a trick qzmSEPqzm. 
 but in any case a forced marriage is no marriage  but it is a very serious felony  as you will discover before you have finished qzmSEPqzm. 
 youll have time to think the point out during the next ten years or so  unless i am mistaken qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to you  carruthers  you would have done better to keep your pistol in your pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  i begin to think so  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  but when i thought of all the precaution i had taken to shield this girlfor i loved her  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and it is the only time that ever i knew what love wasit fairly drove me mad to think that she was in the power of the greatest brute and bully in south africa  a man whose name is a holy terror from kimberley to johannesburg qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  youll hardly believe it  but ever since that girl has been in my employment i never once let her go past this house  where i knew these rascals were lurking  without following her on my bicycle just to see that she came to no harm qzmSEPqzm. 
 i kept my distance from her  and i wore a beard so that she should not recognise me  for she is a good and highspirited girl  and she wouldnt have stayed in my employment long if she had thought that i was following her about the country roads qzmSEPqzm. 
  why didnt you tell her of her danger  because then  again  she would have left me  and i couldnt bear to face that qzmSEPqzm. 
 even if she couldnt love me it was a great deal to me just to see her dainty form about the house  and to hear the sound of her voice qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said i  you call that love  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  but i should call it selfishness qzmSEPqzm. 
  maybe the two things go together qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyhow  i couldnt let her go qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  with this crowd about  it was well that she should have someone near to look after her qzmSEPqzm. 
 then when the cable came i knew they were bound to make a move qzmSEPqzm. 
  what cable  carruthers took a telegram from his pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats it  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was short and concise  the old man is dead qzmSEPqzm. 
  hum said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think i see how things worked  and i can understand how this message would  as you say  bring them to a head qzmSEPqzm. 
 but while we wait you might tell me what you can qzmSEPqzm. 
  the old reprobate with the surplice burst into a volley of bad language qzmSEPqzm. 
  by heaven  said he  if you squeal on us  bob carruthers  ill serve you as you served jack woodley qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can bleat about the girl to your hearts content  for thats your own affair  but if you round on your pals to this plainclothes copper it will be the worst days work that ever you did qzmSEPqzm. 
  your reverence need not be excited  said holmes  lighting a cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
 the case is clear enough against you  and all i ask is a few details for my private curiosity qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  if theres any difficulty in your telling me ill do the talking  and then you will see how far you have a chance of holding back your secrets qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the first place  three of you came from south africa on this gameyou williamson  you carruthers  and woodley qzmSEPqzm. 
  lie number one  said the old man  i never saw either of them until two months ago  and i have never been in africa in my life  so you can put that in your pipe and smoke it  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 busybody holmes  what he says is true  said carruthers qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  two of you came over qzmSEPqzm. 
 his reverence is our own homemade article qzmSEPqzm. 
 you had known ralph smith in south africa qzmSEPqzm. 
 you had reason to believe he would not live long qzmSEPqzm. 
 you found out that his niece would inherit his fortune qzmSEPqzm. 
 hows thateh  carruthers nodded and williamson swore qzmSEPqzm. 
  she was nextofkin  no doubt  and you were aware that the old fellow would make no will qzmSEPqzm. 
  couldnt read or write  said carruthers qzmSEPqzm. 
  so you came over  the two of you  and hunted up the girl qzmSEPqzm. 
 the idea was that one of you was to marry her and the other have a share of the plunder qzmSEPqzm. 
 for some reason woodley was chosen as the husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 why was that  we played cards for her on the voyage qzmSEPqzm. 
 he won qzmSEPqzm. 
  i see qzmSEPqzm. 
 you got the young lady into your service  and there woodley was to do the courting qzmSEPqzm. 
 she recognised the drunken brute that he was  and would have nothing to do with him qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  your arrangement was rather upset by the fact that you had yourself fallen in love with the lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 you could no longer bear the idea of this ruffian owning her qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  by george  i couldnt  there was a quarrel between you qzmSEPqzm. 
 he left you in a rage  and began to make his own plans independently of you qzmSEPqzm. 
  it strikes me  williamson  there isnt very much that we can tell this gentleman  cried carruthers  with a bitter laugh qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  we quarreled  and he knocked me down qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am level with him on that  anyhow qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i lost sight of him qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was when he picked up with this cast padre here qzmSEPqzm. 
 i found that they had set up housekeeping together at this place on the line that she had to pass for the station qzmSEPqzm. 
 i kept my eye on her after that  for i knew there was some devilry in the wind qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw them from time to time  for i was anxious to know what they were after qzmSEPqzm. 
 two days ago woodley came up to my house with this cable  which showed that ralph smith was dead qzmSEPqzm. 
 he asked me if i would stand by the bargain qzmSEPqzm. 
 i said i would not qzmSEPqzm. 
 he asked me if i would marry the girl myself and give him a share qzmSEPqzm. 
 i said i would willingly do so  but that she would not have me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he said  let us get her married first  and after a week or two she may see things a bit different qzmSEPqzm. 
 i said i would have nothing to do with violence qzmSEPqzm. 
 so he went off cursing  like the foulmouthed blackguard that he was  and swearing that he would have her yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was leaving me this weekend  and i had got a trap to take her to the station  but i was so uneasy in my mind that i followed her on my bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had got a start  however  and before i could catch her the mischief was done qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first thing i knew about it was when i saw you two gentlemen driving back in her dogcart qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes rose and tossed the end of his cigarette into the grate qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been very obtuse  watson  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 when in your report you said that you had seen the cyclist as you thought arrange his necktie in the shrubbery  that alone should have told me all qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  we may congratulate ourselves upon a curious and in some respects a unique case qzmSEPqzm. 
 i perceive three of the county constabulary in the drive  and i am glad to see that the little ostler is able to keep pace with them  so it is likely that neither he nor the interesting bridegroom will be permanently damaged by their mornings adventures qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  watson  that in your medical capacity you might wait upon miss smith and tell her that if she is sufficiently recovered we shall be happy to escort her to her mothers home qzmSEPqzm. 
 if she is not quite convalescent you will find that a hint that we were about to telegraph to a young electrician in the midlands would probably complete the cure qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 carruthers  i think that you have done what you could to make amends for your share in an evil plot qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is my card  sir  and if my evidence can be of help to you in your trial it shall be at your disposal qzmSEPqzm. 
   in the whirl of our incessant activity it has often been difficult for me  as the reader has probably observed  to round off my narratives  and to give those final details which the curious might expect qzmSEPqzm. 
 each case has been the prelude to another  and the crisis once over the actors have passed for ever out of our busy lives qzmSEPqzm. 
 i find  however  a short note at the end of my manuscripts dealing with this case  in which i have put it upon record that miss violet smith did indeed inherit a large fortune  and that she is now the wife of cyril morton  the senior partner of morton  kennedy  the famous westminster electricians qzmSEPqzm. 
 williamson and woodley were both tried for abduction and assault  the former getting seven years and the latter ten qzmSEPqzm. 
 of the fate of carruthers i have no record  but i am sure that his assault was not viewed very gravely by the court  since woodley had the reputation of being a most dangerous ruffian  and i think that a few months were sufficient to satisfy the demands of justice qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the priory school qzmSEPqzm. 
   we have had some dramatic entrances and exits upon our small stage at baker street  but i cannot recollect anything more sudden and startling than the first appearance of thorneycroft huxtable  m qzmSEPqzm. 
a qzmSEPqzm. 
  ph qzmSEPqzm. 
d qzmSEPqzm. 
  etc qzmSEPqzm. 
 his card  which seemed too small to carry the weight of his academic distinctions  preceded him by a few seconds  and then he entered himselfso large  so pompous  and so dignified that he was the very embodiment of selfpossession and solidity qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet his first action when the door had closed behind him was to stagger against the table  whence he slipped down upon the floor  and there was that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin hearthrug qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had sprung to our feet  and for a few moments we stared in silent amazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage  which told of some sudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life qzmSEPqzm. 
 then holmes hurried with a cushion for his head and i with brandy for his lips qzmSEPqzm. 
 the heavy white face was seamed with lines of trouble  the hanging pouches under the closed eyes were leaden in colour  the loose mouth drooped dolorously at the corners  the rolling chins were unshaven qzmSEPqzm. 
 collar and shirt bore the grime of a long journey  and the hair bristled unkempt from the wellshaped head qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a sorelystricken man who lay before us qzmSEPqzm. 
  what is it  watson asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  absolute exhaustionpossibly mere hunger and fatigue  said i  with my finger on the thready pulse  where the stream of life trickled thin and small qzmSEPqzm. 
  return ticket from mackleton  in the north of england  said holmes  drawing it from the watchpocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is not twelve oclock yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has certainly been an early starter qzmSEPqzm. 
  the puckered eyelids had begun to quiver  and now a pair of vacant  grey eyes looked up at us qzmSEPqzm. 
 an instant later the man had scrambled on to his feet  his face crimson with shame qzmSEPqzm. 
  forgive this weakness  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i have been a little overwrought qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank you  if i might have a glass of milk and a biscuit i have no doubt that i should be better qzmSEPqzm. 
 i came personally  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  in order to ensure that you would return with me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i feared that no telegram would convince you of the absolute urgency of the case qzmSEPqzm. 
  when you are quite restored  i am quite well again qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cannot imagine how i came to be so weak qzmSEPqzm. 
 i wish you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  to come to mackleton with me by the next train qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend shook his head qzmSEPqzm. 
  my colleague  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  could tell you that we are very busy at present qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am retained in this case of the ferrers documents  and the abergavenny murder is coming up for trial qzmSEPqzm. 
 only a very important issue could call me from london at present qzmSEPqzm. 
  important our visitor threw up his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you heard nothing of the abduction of the only son of the duke of holdernesse  what the late cabinet minister  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had tried to keep it out of the papers  but there was some rumour in the globe last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought it might have reached your ears qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes shot out his long  thin arm and picked out volume h in his encyclopaedia of reference qzmSEPqzm. 
  holdernesse   qzmNUMqzm th duke  k qzmSEPqzm. 
g qzmSEPqzm. 
  p qzmSEPqzm. 
c qzmSEPqzm. 
half the alphabet baron beverley  earl of carstondear me  what a list lord lieutenant of hallamshire since  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 married edith  daughter of sir charles appledore   qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 heir and only child  lord saltire qzmSEPqzm. 
 owns about two hundred and fifty thousand acres qzmSEPqzm. 
 minerals in lancashire and wales qzmSEPqzm. 
 address carlton house terrace  holdernesse hall  hallamshire  carston castle  bangor  wales qzmSEPqzm. 
 lord of the admiralty   qzmNUMqzm   chief secretary of state for well  well  this man is certainly one of the greatest subjects of the crown  the greatest and perhaps the wealthiest qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am aware  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that you take a very high line in professional matters  and that you are prepared to work for the works sake qzmSEPqzm. 
 i may tell you  however  that his grace has already intimated that a cheque for five thousand pounds will be handed over to the person who can tell him where his son is  and another thousand to him who can name the man  or men  who have taken him qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is a princely offer  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  i think that we shall accompany dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable back to the north of england qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  when you have consumed that milk you will kindly tell me what has happened  when it happened  how it happened  and  finally  what dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 thorneycroft huxtable  of the priory school  near mackleton  has to do with the matter  and why he comes three days after an eventthe state of your chin gives the dateto ask for my humble services qzmSEPqzm. 
  our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits qzmSEPqzm. 
 the light had come back to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks as he set himself with great vigour and lucidity to explain the situation qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must inform you  gentlemen  that the priory is a preparatory school  of which i am the founder and principal qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtables sidelights on horace may possibly recall my name to your memories qzmSEPqzm. 
 the priory is  without exception  the best and most select preparatory school in england qzmSEPqzm. 
 lord leverstoke  the earl of blackwater  sir cathcart soamesthey all have entrusted their sons to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i felt that my school had reached its zenith when  three weeks ago  the duke of holdernesse sent mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder  his secretary  with the intimation that young lord saltire  ten years old  his only son and heir  was about to be committed to my charge qzmSEPqzm. 
 little did i think that this would be the prelude to the most crushing misfortune of my life qzmSEPqzm. 
  on may  qzmNUMqzm st the boy arrived  that being the beginning of the summer term qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a charming youth  and he soon fell into our ways qzmSEPqzm. 
 i may tell youi trust that i am not indiscreet  but halfconfidences are absurd in such a casethat he was not entirely happy at home qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is an open secret that the dukes married life had not been a peaceful one  and the matter had ended in a separation by mutual consent  the duchess taking up her residence in the south of france qzmSEPqzm. 
 this had occurred very shortly before  and the boys sympathies are known to have been strongly with his mother qzmSEPqzm. 
 he moped after her departure from holdernesse hall  and it was for this reason that the duke desired to send him to my establishment qzmSEPqzm. 
 in a fortnight the boy was quite at home with us  and was apparently absolutely happy qzmSEPqzm. 
  he was last seen on the night of may  qzmNUMqzm ththat is  the night of last monday qzmSEPqzm. 
 his room was on the second floor  and was approached through another larger room in which two boys were sleeping qzmSEPqzm. 
 these boys saw and heard nothing  so that it is certain that young saltire did not pass out that way qzmSEPqzm. 
 his window was open  and there is a stout ivy plant leading to the ground qzmSEPqzm. 
 we could trace no footmarks below  but it is sure that this is the only possible exit qzmSEPqzm. 
  his absence was discovered at seven oclock on tuesday morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 his bed had been slept in qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had dressed himself fully before going off in his usual school suit of black eton jacket and dark grey trousers qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were no signs that anyone had entered the room  and it is quite certain that anything in the nature of cries  or a struggle  would have been heard  since caunter  the elder boy in the inner room  is a very light sleeper qzmSEPqzm. 
  when lord saltires disappearance was discovered i at once called a roll of the whole establishment  boys  masters  and servants qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was then that we ascertained that lord saltire had not been alone in his flight qzmSEPqzm. 
 heidegger  the german master  was missing qzmSEPqzm. 
 his room was on the second floor  at the farther end of the building  facing the same way as lord saltires qzmSEPqzm. 
 his bed had also been slept in  but he had apparently gone away partly dressed  since his shirt and socks were lying on the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had undoubtedly let himself down by the ivy  for we could see the marks of his feet where he had landed on the lawn qzmSEPqzm. 
 his bicycle was kept in a small shed beside this lawn  and it also was gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  he had been with me for two years  and came with the best references  but he was a silent  morose man  not very popular either with masters or boys qzmSEPqzm. 
 no trace could be found of the fugitives  and now on thursday morning we are as ignorant as we were on tuesday qzmSEPqzm. 
 inquiry was  of course  made at once at holdernesse hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is only a few miles away  and we imagined that in some sudden attack of homesickness he had gone back to his father  but nothing had been heard of him qzmSEPqzm. 
 the duke is greatly agitatedand as to me  you have seen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which the suspense and the responsibility have reduced me qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  if ever you put forward your full powers  i implore you to do so now  for never in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of them qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to the statement of the unhappy schoolmaster qzmSEPqzm. 
 his drawn brows and the deep furrow between them showed that he needed no exhortation to concentrate all his attention upon a problem which  apart from the tremendous interests involved  must appeal so directly to his love of the complex and the unusual qzmSEPqzm. 
 he now drew out his notebook and jotted down one or two memoranda qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner  said he  severely qzmSEPqzm. 
 you start me on my investigation with a very serious handicap qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is inconceivable  for example  that this ivy and this lawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am not to blame  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 his grace was extremely desirous to avoid all public scandal qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was afraid of his family unhappiness being dragged before the world qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has a deep horror of anything of the kind qzmSEPqzm. 
  but there has been some official investigation  yes  sir  and it has proved most disappointing qzmSEPqzm. 
 an apparent clue was at once obtained  since a boy and a young man were reported to have been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train qzmSEPqzm. 
 only last night we had news that the couple had been hunted down in liverpool  and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter in hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 then it was that in my despair and disappointment  after a sleepless night  i came straight to you by the early train qzmSEPqzm. 
  i suppose the local investigation was relaxed while this false clue was being followed up  it was entirely dropped qzmSEPqzm. 
  so that three days have been wasted qzmSEPqzm. 
 the affair has been most deplorably handled qzmSEPqzm. 
  i feel it  and admit it qzmSEPqzm. 
  and yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall be very happy to look into it qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you been able to trace any connection between the missing boy and this german master  none at all qzmSEPqzm. 
  was he in the masters class  no  he never exchanged a word with him so far as i know qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is certainly very singular qzmSEPqzm. 
 had the boy a bicycle  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  was any other bicycle missing  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  is that certain  quite qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  now  you do not mean to seriously suggest that this german rode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night bearing the boy in his arms  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  then what is the theory in your mind  the bicycle may have been a blind qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may have been hidden somewhere and the pair gone off on foot qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so  but it seems rather an absurd blind  does it not were there other bicycles in this shed  several qzmSEPqzm. 
  would he not have hidden a couple had he desired to give the idea that they had gone off upon them  i suppose he would qzmSEPqzm. 
  of course he would qzmSEPqzm. 
 the blind theory wont do qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the incident is an admirable startingpoint for an investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 after all  a bicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy qzmSEPqzm. 
 one other question qzmSEPqzm. 
 did anyone call to see the boy on the day before he disappeared  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  did he get any letters  yes  one letter qzmSEPqzm. 
  from whom  from his father qzmSEPqzm. 
  do you open the boys letters  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  how do you know it was from the father  the coat of arms was on the envelope  and it was addressed in the dukes peculiar stiff hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  the duke remembers having written qzmSEPqzm. 
  when had he a letter before that  not for several days qzmSEPqzm. 
  had he ever one from france  no  never qzmSEPqzm. 
  you see the point of my questions  of course qzmSEPqzm. 
 either the boy was carried off by force or he went of his own free will qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the latter case you would expect that some prompting from outside would be needed to make so young a lad do such a thing qzmSEPqzm. 
 if he has had no visitors  that prompting must have come in letters qzmSEPqzm. 
 hence i try to find out who were his correspondents qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fear i cannot help you much qzmSEPqzm. 
 his only correspondent  so far as i know  was his own father qzmSEPqzm. 
  who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance qzmSEPqzm. 
 were the relations between father and son very friendly  his grace is never very friendly with anyone qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is completely immersed in large public questions  and is rather inaccessible to all ordinary emotions qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he was always kind to the boy in his own way qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the sympathies of the latter were with the mother  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
  did he say so  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  the duke  then  good heavens  no  then how could you know  i have had some confidential talks with mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder  his graces secretary qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was he who gave me the information about lord saltires feelings qzmSEPqzm. 
  i see qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  that last letter of the dukeswas it found in the boys room after he was gone  no  he had taken it with him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  it is time that we were leaving for euston qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will order a fourwheeler qzmSEPqzm. 
 in a quarter of an hour we shall be at your service qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you are telegraphing home  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  it would be well to allow the people in your neighbourhood to imagine that the inquiry is still going on in liverpool  or wherever else that red herring led your pack qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the meantime i will do a little quiet work at your own doors  and perhaps the scent is not so cold but that two old hounds like watson and myself may get a sniff of it qzmSEPqzm. 
   that evening found us in the cold  bracing atmosphere of the peak country  in which dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtables famous school is situated qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was already dark when we reached it qzmSEPqzm. 
 a card was lying on the hall table  and the butler whispered something to his master  who turned to us with agitation in every heavy feature qzmSEPqzm. 
  the duke is here  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 the duke and mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilder are in the study qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  gentlemen  and i will introduce you qzmSEPqzm. 
  i was  of course  familiar with the pictures of the famous statesman  but the man himself was very different from his representation qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a tall and stately person  scrupulously dressed  with a drawn  thin face  and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long qzmSEPqzm. 
 his complexion was of a dead pallor  which was more startling by contrast with a long  dwindling beard of vivid red  which flowed down over his white waistcoat  with his watchchain gleaming through its fringe qzmSEPqzm. 
 such was the stately presence who looked stonily at us from the centre of dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtables hearthrug qzmSEPqzm. 
 beside him stood a very young man  whom i understood to be wilder  the private secretary qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was small  nervous  alert  with intelligent  lightblue eyes and mobile features qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was he who at once  in an incisive and positive tone  opened the conversation qzmSEPqzm. 
  i called this morning  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  too late to prevent you from starting for london qzmSEPqzm. 
 i learned that your object was to invite mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes to undertake the conduct of this case qzmSEPqzm. 
 his grace is surprised  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  that you should have taken such a step without consulting him qzmSEPqzm. 
  when i learned that the police had failed  his grace is by no means convinced that the police have failed qzmSEPqzm. 
  but surely  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilder  you are well aware  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  that his grace is particularly anxious to avoid all public scandal qzmSEPqzm. 
 he prefers to take as few people as possible into his confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  the matter can be easily remedied  said the browbeaten doctor  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes can return to london by the morning train qzmSEPqzm. 
  hardly that  doctor  hardly that  said holmes  in his blandest voice qzmSEPqzm. 
 this northern air is invigorating and pleasant  so i propose to spend a few days upon your moors  and to occupy my mind as best i may qzmSEPqzm. 
 whether i have the shelter of your roof or of the village inn is  of course  for you to decide qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage of indecision  from which he was rescued by the deep  sonorous voice of the redbearded duke  which boomed out like a dinnergong qzmSEPqzm. 
  i agree with mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilder  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  that you would have done wisely to consult me qzmSEPqzm. 
 but since mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes has already been taken into your confidence  it would indeed be absurd that we should not avail ourselves of his services qzmSEPqzm. 
 far from going to the inn  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i should be pleased if you would come and stay with me at holdernesse hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  i thank your grace qzmSEPqzm. 
 for the purposes of my investigation i think that it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the mystery qzmSEPqzm. 
  just as you like  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 any information which mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilder or i can give you is  of course  at your disposal qzmSEPqzm. 
  it will probably be necessary for me to see you at the hall  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would only ask you now  sir  whether you have formed any explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance of your son  no  sir  i have not qzmSEPqzm. 
  excuse me if i allude to that which is painful to you  but i have no alternative qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you think that the duchess had anything to do with the matter  the great minister showed perceptible hesitation qzmSEPqzm. 
  i do not think so  he said  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
  the other most obvious explanation is that the child has been kidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have not had any demand of the sort  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  one more question  your grace qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understand that you wrote to your son upon the day when this incident occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  i wrote upon the day before qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he received it on that day  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
  was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced him or induced him to take such a step  no  sir  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you post that letter yourself  the noblemans reply was interrupted by his secretary  who broke in with some heat qzmSEPqzm. 
  his grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 this letter was laid with others upon the study table  and i myself put them in the postbag qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are sure this one was among them  yes  i observed it qzmSEPqzm. 
  how many letters did your grace write that day  twenty or thirty qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have a large correspondence qzmSEPqzm. 
 but surely this is somewhat irrelevant  not entirely  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  for my own part  the duke continued  i have advised the police to turn their attention to the south of france qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have already said that i do not believe that the duchess would encourage so monstrous an action  but the lad had the most wrongheaded opinions  and it is possible that he may have fled to her  aided and abetted by this german qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  that we will now return to the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could see that there were other questions which holmes would have wished to put  but the noblemans abrupt manner showed that the interview was at an end qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident that to his intensely aristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family affairs with a stranger was most abhorrent  and that he feared lest every fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the discreetly shadowed corners of his ducal history qzmSEPqzm. 
  when the nobleman and his secretary had left  my friend flung himself at once with characteristic eagerness into the investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
  the boys chamber was carefully examined  and yielded nothing save the absolute conviction that it was only through the window that he could have escaped qzmSEPqzm. 
 the german masters room and effects gave no further clue qzmSEPqzm. 
 in his case a trailer of ivy had given way under his weight  and we saw by the light of a lantern the mark on the lawn where his heels had come down qzmSEPqzm. 
 that one dint in the short green grass was the only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnal flight qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes left the house alone  and only returned after eleven qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had obtained a large ordnance map of the neighbourhood  and this he brought into my room  where he laid it out on the bed  and  having balanced the lamp in the middle of it  he began to smoke over it  and occasionally to point out objects of interest with the reeking amber of his pipe qzmSEPqzm. 
  this case grows upon me  watson  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are decidedly some points of interest in connection with it qzmSEPqzm. 
 in this early stage i want you to realize those geographical features which may have a good deal to do with our investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
  graphic  look at this map qzmSEPqzm. 
 this dark square is the priory school qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill put a pin in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  this line is the main road qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see that it runs east and west past the school  and you see also that there is no side road for a mile either way qzmSEPqzm. 
 if these two folk passed away by road it was this road qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
  by a singular and happy chance we are able to some extent to check what passed along this road during the night in question qzmSEPqzm. 
 at this point  where my pipe is now resting  a country constable was on duty from twelve to six qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is  as you perceive  the first cross road on the east side qzmSEPqzm. 
 this man declares that he was not absent from his post for an instant  and he is positive that neither boy nor man could have gone that way unseen qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have spoken with this policeman tonight  and he appears to me to be a perfectly reliable person qzmSEPqzm. 
 that blocks this end qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have now to deal with the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is an inn here  the red bull  the landlady of which was ill qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had sent to mackleton for a doctor  but he did not arrive until morning  being absent at another case qzmSEPqzm. 
 the people at the inn were alert all night  awaiting his coming  and one or other of them seems to have continually had an eye upon the road qzmSEPqzm. 
 they declare that no one passed qzmSEPqzm. 
 if their evidence is good  then we are fortunate enough to be able to block the west  and also to be able to say that the fugitives did not use the road at all qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the bicycle i objected qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so qzmSEPqzm. 
 we will come to the bicycle presently qzmSEPqzm. 
 to continue our reasoning if these people did not go by the road  they must have traversed the country to the north of the house or to the south of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is certain qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us weigh the one against the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the south of the house is  as you perceive  a large district of arable land  cut up into small fields  with stone walls between them qzmSEPqzm. 
 there  i admit that a bicycle is impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 we can dismiss the idea qzmSEPqzm. 
 we turn to the country on the north qzmSEPqzm. 
 here there lies a grove of trees  marked as the ragged shaw  and on the farther side stretches a great rolling moor  lower gill moor  extending for ten miles and sloping gradually upwards qzmSEPqzm. 
 here  at one side of this wilderness  is holdernesse hall  ten miles by road  but only six across the moor qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a peculiarly desolate plain qzmSEPqzm. 
 a few moor farmers have small holdings  where they rear sheep and cattle qzmSEPqzm. 
 except these  the plover and the curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to the chesterfield high road qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a church there  you see  a few cottages  and an inn qzmSEPqzm. 
 beyond that the hills become precipitous qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely it is here to the north that our quest must lie qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the bicycle i persisted qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well said holmes  impatiently qzmSEPqzm. 
 a good cyclist does not need a high road qzmSEPqzm. 
 the moor is intersected with paths and the moon was at the full qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa what is this  there was an agitated knock at the door  and an instant afterwards dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable was in the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 in his hand he held a blue cricketcap  with a white chevron on the peak qzmSEPqzm. 
  at last we have a clue he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank heaven at last we are on the dear boys track it is his cap qzmSEPqzm. 
  where was it found  in the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor qzmSEPqzm. 
 they left on tuesday qzmSEPqzm. 
 today the police traced them down and examined their caravan qzmSEPqzm. 
 this was found qzmSEPqzm. 
  how do they account for it  they shuffled and liedsaid that they found it on the moor on tuesday morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 they know where he is  the rascals thank goodness  they are all safe under lock and key qzmSEPqzm. 
 either the fear of the law or the dukes purse will certainly get out of them all that they know qzmSEPqzm. 
  so far  so good  said holmes  when the doctor had at last left the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 it at least bears out the theory that it is on the side of the lower gill moor that we must hope for results qzmSEPqzm. 
 the police have really done nothing locally  save the arrest of these gipsies qzmSEPqzm. 
 look here  watson there is a watercourse across the moor qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see it marked here in the map qzmSEPqzm. 
 in some parts it widens into a morass qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is particularly so in the region between holdernesse hall and the school qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is vain to look elsewhere for tracks in this dry weather  but at that point there is certainly a chance of some record being left qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will call you early tomorrow morning  and you and i will try if we can throw some little light upon the mystery qzmSEPqzm. 
  the day was just breaking when i woke to find the long  thin form of holmes by my bedside qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was fully dressed  and had apparently already been out qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have done the lawn and the bicycle shed  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have also had a ramble through the ragged shaw qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  watson  there is cocoa ready in the next room qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must beg you to hurry  for we have a great day before us qzmSEPqzm. 
  his eyes shone  and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration of the master workman who sees his work lie ready before him qzmSEPqzm. 
 a very different holmes  this active  alert man  from the introspective and pallid dreamer of baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 i felt  as i looked upon that supple figure  alive with nervous energy  that it was indeed a strenuous day that awaited us qzmSEPqzm. 
  and yet it opened in the blackest disappointment qzmSEPqzm. 
 with high hopes we struck across the peaty  russet moor  intersected with a thousand sheep paths  until we came to the broad  lightgreen belt which marked the morass between us and holdernesse qzmSEPqzm. 
 certainly  if the lad had gone homewards  he must have passed this  and he could not pass it without leaving his traces qzmSEPqzm. 
 but no sign of him or the german could be seen qzmSEPqzm. 
 with a darkening face my friend strode along the margin  eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface qzmSEPqzm. 
 sheepmarks there were in profusion  and at one place  some miles down  cows had left their tracks qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing more qzmSEPqzm. 
  check number one  said holmes  looking gloomily over the rolling expanse of the moor qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is another morass down yonder and a narrow neck between qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa halloa halloa what have we here  we had come on a small black ribbon of pathway qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the middle of it  clearly marked on the sodden soil  was the track of a bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
  hurrah i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have it qzmSEPqzm. 
  but holmes was shaking his head  and his face was puzzled and expectant rather than joyous qzmSEPqzm. 
  a bicycle  certainly  but not the bicycle  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am familiar with fortytwo different impressions left by tyres qzmSEPqzm. 
 this  as you perceive  is a dunlop  with a patch upon the outer cover qzmSEPqzm. 
 heideggers tyres were palmers  leaving longitudinal stripes qzmSEPqzm. 
 aveling  the mathematical master  was sure upon the point qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore  it is not heideggers track qzmSEPqzm. 
  the boys  then  possibly  if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his possession qzmSEPqzm. 
 but this we have utterly failed to do qzmSEPqzm. 
 this track  as you perceive  was made by a rider who was going from the direction of the school qzmSEPqzm. 
  or towards it  no  no  my dear watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 the more deeply sunk impression is  of course  the hind wheel  upon which the weight rests qzmSEPqzm. 
 you perceive several places where it has passed across and obliterated the more shallow mark of the front one qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was undoubtedly heading away from the school qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may or may not be connected with our inquiry  but we will follow it backwards before we go any farther qzmSEPqzm. 
  we did so  and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks as we emerged from the boggy portion of the moor qzmSEPqzm. 
 following the path backwards  we picked out another spot  where a spring trickled across it qzmSEPqzm. 
 here  once again  was the mark of the bicycle  though nearly obliterated by the hoofs of cows qzmSEPqzm. 
 after that there was no sign  but the path ran right on into ragged shaw  the wood which backed on to the school qzmSEPqzm. 
 from this wood the cycle must have emerged qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes sat down on a boulder and rested his chin in his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had smoked two cigarettes before he moved qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  said he  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is  of course  possible that a cunning man might change the tyre of his bicycle in order to leave unfamiliar tracks qzmSEPqzm. 
 a criminal who was capable of such a thought is a man whom i should be proud to do business with qzmSEPqzm. 
 we will leave this question undecided and hark back to our morass again  for we have left a good deal unexplored qzmSEPqzm. 
  we continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden portion of the moor  and soon our perseverance was gloriously rewarded qzmSEPqzm. 
 right across the lower part of the bog lay a miry path qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes gave a cry of delight as he approached it qzmSEPqzm. 
 an impression like a fine bundle of telegraph wires ran down the centre of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the palmer tyre qzmSEPqzm. 
  here is herr heidegger  sure enough cried holmes  exultantly qzmSEPqzm. 
 my reasoning seems to have been pretty sound  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  i congratulate you qzmSEPqzm. 
  but we have a long way still to go qzmSEPqzm. 
 kindly walk clear of the path qzmSEPqzm. 
 now let us follow the trail qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fear that it will not lead very far qzmSEPqzm. 
  we found  however  as we advanced that this portion of the moor is intersected with soft patches  and  though we frequently lost sight of the track  we always succeeded in picking it up once more qzmSEPqzm. 
  do you observe  said holmes  that the rider is now undoubtedly forcing the pace there can be no doubt of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 look at this impression  where you get both tyres clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 the one is as deep as the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 that can only mean that the rider is throwing his weight on to the handlebar  as a man does when he is sprinting qzmSEPqzm. 
 by jove he has had a fall qzmSEPqzm. 
  there was a broad  irregular smudge covering some yards of the track qzmSEPqzm. 
 then there were a few footmarks  and the tyre reappeared once more qzmSEPqzm. 
  a sideslip  i suggested qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse qzmSEPqzm. 
 to my horror i perceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with crimson qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the path  too  and among the heather were dark stains of clotted blood qzmSEPqzm. 
  bad said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 bad stand clear  watson not an unnecessary footstep what do i read here he fell wounded  he stood up  he remounted  he proceeded qzmSEPqzm. 
 but there is no other track qzmSEPqzm. 
 cattle on this side path qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was surely not gored by a bull impossible but i see no traces of anyone else qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must push on  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely with stains as well as the track to guide us he cannot escape us now qzmSEPqzm. 
  our search was not a very long one qzmSEPqzm. 
 the tracks of the tyre began to curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly  as i looked ahead  the gleam of metal caught my eye from amid the thick gorse bushes qzmSEPqzm. 
 out of them we dragged a bicycle  palmertyred  one pedal bent  and the whole front of it horribly smeared and slobbered with blood qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting qzmSEPqzm. 
 we ran round  and there lay the unfortunate rider qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a tall man  full bearded  with spectacles  one glass of which had been knocked out qzmSEPqzm. 
 the cause of his death was a frightful blow upon the head  which had crushed in part of his skull qzmSEPqzm. 
 that he could have gone on after receiving such an injury said much for the vitality and courage of the man qzmSEPqzm. 
 he wore shoes  but no socks  and his open coat disclosed a nightshirt beneath it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was undoubtedly the german master qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes turned the body over reverently  and examined it with great attention qzmSEPqzm. 
 he then sat in deep thought for a time  and i could see by his ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not  in his opinion  advanced us much in our inquiry qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is a little difficult to know what to do  watson  said he  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
 my own inclinations are to push this inquiry on  for we have already lost so much time that we cannot afford to waste another hour qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other hand  we are bound to inform the police of the discovery  and to see that this poor fellows body is looked after qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could take a note back qzmSEPqzm. 
  but i need your company and assistance qzmSEPqzm. 
 wait a bit there is a fellow cutting peat up yonder qzmSEPqzm. 
 bring him over here  and he will guide the police qzmSEPqzm. 
  i brought the peasant across  and holmes dispatched the frightened man with a note to dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  watson  said he  we have picked up two clues this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 one is the bicycle with the palmer tyre  and we see what that has led to qzmSEPqzm. 
 the other is the bicycle with the patched dunlop qzmSEPqzm. 
 before we start to investigate that  let us try to realize what we do know so as to make the most of it  and to separate the essential from the accidental qzmSEPqzm. 
  first of all i wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly left of his own free will qzmSEPqzm. 
 he got down from his window and he went off  either alone or with someone qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is sure qzmSEPqzm. 
  i assented qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  now  let us turn to this unfortunate german master qzmSEPqzm. 
 the boy was fully dressed when he fled qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore  he foresaw what he would do qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the german went without his socks qzmSEPqzm. 
 he certainly acted on very short notice qzmSEPqzm. 
  undoubtedly qzmSEPqzm. 
  why did he go because  from his bedroom window  he saw the flight of the boy qzmSEPqzm. 
 because he wished to overtake him and bring him back qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seized his bicycle  pursued the lad  and in pursuing him met his death qzmSEPqzm. 
  so it would seem qzmSEPqzm. 
  now i come to the critical part of my argument qzmSEPqzm. 
 the natural action of a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would know that he could overtake him qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the german does not do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 he turns to his bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am told that he was an excellent cyclist qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would not do this if he did not see that the boy had some swift means of escape qzmSEPqzm. 
  the other bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us continue our reconstruction qzmSEPqzm. 
 he meets his death five miles from the schoolnot by a bullet  mark you  which even a lad might conceivably discharge  but by a savage blow dealt by a vigorous arm qzmSEPqzm. 
 the lad  then  had a companion in his flight qzmSEPqzm. 
 and the flight was a swift one  since it took five miles before an expert cyclist could overtake them qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet we survey the ground round the scene of the tragedy qzmSEPqzm. 
 what do we find a few cattle tracks  nothing more qzmSEPqzm. 
 i took a wide sweep round  and there is no path within fifty yards qzmSEPqzm. 
 another cyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder qzmSEPqzm. 
 nor were there any human footmarks qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes  i cried  this is impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
  admirable he said qzmSEPqzm. 
 a most illuminating remark qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is impossible as i state it  and therefore i must in some respect have stated it wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet you saw for yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
 can you suggest any fallacy  he could not have fractured his skull in a fall  in a morass  watson  i am at my wits end qzmSEPqzm. 
  tut  tut  we have solved some worse problems qzmSEPqzm. 
 at least we have plenty of material  if we can only use it qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  then  and  having exhausted the palmer  let us see what the dunlop with the patched cover has to offer us qzmSEPqzm. 
  we picked up the track and followed it onwards for some distance  but soon the moor rose into a long  heathertufted curve  and we left the watercourse behind us qzmSEPqzm. 
 no further help from tracks could be hoped for qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the spot where we saw the last of the dunlop tyre it might equally have led to holdernesse hall  the stately towers of which rose some miles to our left  or to a low  grey village which lay in front of us  and marked the position of the chesterfield high road qzmSEPqzm. 
  as we approached the forbidding and squalid inn  with the sign of a gamecock above the door  holmes gave a sudden groan and clutched me by the shoulder to save himself from falling qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had had one of those violent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless qzmSEPqzm. 
 with difficulty he limped up to the door  where a squat  dark  elderly man was smoking a black clay pipe qzmSEPqzm. 
  how are you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 reuben hayes said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  who are you  and how do you get my name so pat the countryman answered  with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  its printed on the board above your head qzmSEPqzm. 
 its easy to see a man who is master of his own house qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose you havent such a thing as a carriage in your stables  no  i have not qzmSEPqzm. 
  i can hardly put my foot to the ground qzmSEPqzm. 
  dont put it to the ground qzmSEPqzm. 
  but i cant walk qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  then  hop qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 reuben hayess manner was far from gracious  but holmes took it with admirable goodhumour qzmSEPqzm. 
  look here  my man  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is really rather an awkward fix for me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont mind how i get on qzmSEPqzm. 
  neither do i  said the morose landlord qzmSEPqzm. 
  the matter is very important qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would offer you a sovereign for the use of a bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
  the landlord pricked up his ears qzmSEPqzm. 
  where do you want to go  to holdernesse hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  pals of the dook  i suppose said the landlord  surveying our mudstained garments with ironical eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes laughed goodnaturedly qzmSEPqzm. 
  hell be glad to see us  anyhow qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  because we bring him news of his lost son qzmSEPqzm. 
  the landlord gave a very visible start qzmSEPqzm. 
  what  youre on his track  he has been heard of in liverpool qzmSEPqzm. 
 they expect to get him every hour qzmSEPqzm. 
  again a swift change passed over the heavy  unshaven face qzmSEPqzm. 
 his manner was suddenly genial qzmSEPqzm. 
  ive less reason to wish the dook well than most men  said he  for i was his head coachman once  and cruel bad he treated me qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was him that sacked me without a character on the word of a lying cornchandler qzmSEPqzm. 
 but im glad to hear that the young lord was heard of in liverpool  and ill help you to take the news to the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 well have some food first qzmSEPqzm. 
 then you can bring round the bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
  i havent got a bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes held up a sovereign qzmSEPqzm. 
  i tell you  man  that i havent got one qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill let you have two horses as far as the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  said holmes  well talk about it when weve had something to eat qzmSEPqzm. 
  when we were left alone in the stoneflagged kitchen it was astonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was nearly nightfall  and we had eaten nothing since early morning  so that we spent some time over our meal qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was lost in thought  and once or twice he walked over to the window and stared earnestly out qzmSEPqzm. 
 it opened on to a squalid courtyard qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the far corner was a smithy  where a grimy lad was at work qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other side were the stables qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes had sat down again after one of these excursions  when he suddenly sprang out of his chair with a loud exclamation qzmSEPqzm. 
  by heaven  watson  i believe that ive got it he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  yes  it must be so qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  do you remember seeing any cowtracks today  yes  several qzmSEPqzm. 
  where  well  everywhere qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were at the morass  and again on the path  and again near where poor heidegger met his death qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  now  watson  how many cows did you see on the moor  i dont remember seeing any qzmSEPqzm. 
  strange  watson  that we should see tracks all along our line  but never a cow on the whole moor  very strange  watson  eh  yes  it is strange qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  watson  make an effort  throw your mind back can you see those tracks upon the path  yes  i can qzmSEPqzm. 
  can you recall that the tracks were sometimes like that  watsonhe arranged a number of breadcrumbs in this fashionand sometimes like this qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmSEPqzm. 
 and occasionally like this qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmSEPqzm. 
 can you remember that  no  i cannot qzmSEPqzm. 
  but i can qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could swear to it qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  we will go back at our leisure and verify it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what a blind beetle i have been not to draw my conclusion  and what is your conclusion  only that it is a remarkable cow which walks  canters  and gallops qzmSEPqzm. 
 by george  watson  it was no brain of a country publican that thought out such a blind as that the coast seems to be clear  save for that lad in the smithy qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us slip out and see what we can see qzmSEPqzm. 
  there were two roughhaired  unkempt horses in the tumbledown stable qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed aloud qzmSEPqzm. 
  old shoes  but newly shodold shoes  but new nails qzmSEPqzm. 
 this case deserves to be a classic qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us go across to the smithy qzmSEPqzm. 
  the lad continued his work without regarding us qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw holmess eye darting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood which was scattered about the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly  however  we heard a step behind us  and there was the landlord  his heavy eyebrows drawn over his savage eyes  his swarthy features convulsed with passion qzmSEPqzm. 
 he held a short  metalheaded stick in his hand  and he advanced in so menacing a fashion that i was right glad to feel the revolver in my pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  you infernal spies the man cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 what are you doing there  why  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 reuben hayes  said holmes  coolly  one might think that you were afraid of our finding something out qzmSEPqzm. 
  the man mastered himself with a violent effort  and his grim mouth loosened into a false laugh  which was more menacing than his frown qzmSEPqzm. 
  youre welcome to all you can find out in my smithy  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 but look here  mister  i dont care for folk poking about my place without my leave  so the sooner you pay your score and get out of this the better i shall be pleased qzmSEPqzm. 
  all right  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hayesno harm meant  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have been having a look at your horses  but i think ill walk after all qzmSEPqzm. 
 its not far  i believe qzmSEPqzm. 
  not more than two miles to the hall gates qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats the road to the left qzmSEPqzm. 
 he watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his premises qzmSEPqzm. 
  we did not go very far along the road  for holmes stopped the instant that the curve hid us from the landlords view qzmSEPqzm. 
  we were warm  as the children say  at that inn  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i seem to grow colder every step that i take away from it qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  no  i cant possibly leave it qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am convinced  said i  that this reuben hayes knows all about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 a more selfevident villain i never saw qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh he impressed you in that way  did he there are the horses  there is the smithy qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  it is an interesting place  this fighting cock qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think we shall have another look at it in an unobtrusive way qzmSEPqzm. 
  a long  sloping hillside  dotted with grey limestone boulders  stretched behind us qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had turned off the road  and were making our way up the hill  when  looking in the direction of holdernesse hall  i saw a cyclist coming swiftly along qzmSEPqzm. 
  get down  watson cried holmes  with a heavy hand upon my shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us on the road qzmSEPqzm. 
 amid a rolling cloud of dust i caught a glimpse of a pale  agitated facea face with horror in every lineament  the mouth open  the eyes staring wildly in front qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was like some strange caricature of the dapper james wilder whom we had seen the night before qzmSEPqzm. 
  the dukes secretary cried holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  watson  let us see what he does qzmSEPqzm. 
  we scrambled from rock to rock until in a few moments we had made our way to a point from which we could see the front door of the inn qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilders bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one was moving about the house  nor could we catch a glimpse of any faces at the windows qzmSEPqzm. 
 slowly the twilight crept down as the sun sank behind the high towers of holdernesse hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 then in the gloom we saw the two sidelamps of a trap light up in the stable yard of the inn  and shortly afterwards heard the rattle of hoofs  as it wheeled out into the road and tore off at a furious pace in the direction of chesterfield qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you make of that  watson holmes whispered qzmSEPqzm. 
  it looks like a flight qzmSEPqzm. 
  a single man in a dogcart  so far as i could see qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  it certainly was not mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder  for there he is at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  a red square of light had sprung out of the darkness qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the middle of it was the black figure of the secretary  his head advanced  peering out into the night qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident that he was expecting someone qzmSEPqzm. 
 then at last there were steps in the road  a second figure was visible for an instant against the light  the door shut  and all was black once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 five minutes later a lamp was lit in a room upon the first floor qzmSEPqzm. 
  it seems to be a curious class of custom that is done by the fighting cock  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  the bar is on the other side qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so qzmSEPqzm. 
 these are what one may call the private guests qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  what in the world is mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder doing in that den at this hour of night  and who is the companion who comes to meet him there come  watson  we must really take a risk and try to investigate this a little more closely qzmSEPqzm. 
  together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of the inn qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bicycle still leaned against the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes struck a match and held it to the back wheel  and i heard him chuckle as the light fell upon a patched dunlop tyre qzmSEPqzm. 
 up above us was the lighted window qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must have a peep through that  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you bend your back and support yourself upon the wall  i think that i can manage qzmSEPqzm. 
  an instant later his feet were on my shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he was hardly up before he was down again qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  my friend  said he  our days work has been quite long enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think that we have gathered all that we can qzmSEPqzm. 
 its a long walk to the school  and the sooner we get started the better qzmSEPqzm. 
  he hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor  nor would he enter the school when he reached it  but went on to mackleton station  whence he could send some telegrams qzmSEPqzm. 
 late at night i heard him consoling dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable  prostrated by the tragedy of his masters death  and later still he entered my room as alert and vigorous as he had been when he started in the morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 all goes well  my friend  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i promise that before tomorrow evening we shall have reached the solution of the mystery qzmSEPqzm. 
   at eleven oclock next morning my friend and i were walking up the famous yew avenue of holdernesse hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were ushered through the magnificent elizabethan doorway and into his graces study qzmSEPqzm. 
 there we found mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder  demure and courtly  but with some trace of that wild terror of the night before still lurking in his furtive eyes and in his twitching features qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have come to see his grace i am sorry  but the fact is that the duke is far from well qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has been very much upset by the tragic news qzmSEPqzm. 
 we received a telegram from dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable yesterday afternoon  which told us of your discovery qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must see the duke  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilder qzmSEPqzm. 
  but he is in his room qzmSEPqzm. 
  then i must go to his room qzmSEPqzm. 
  i believe he is in his bed qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will see him there qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmess cold and inexorable manner showed the secretary that it was useless to argue with him qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i will tell him that you are here qzmSEPqzm. 
  after half an hours delay the great nobleman appeared qzmSEPqzm. 
 his face was more cadaverous than ever  his shoulders had rounded  and he seemed to me to be an altogether older man than he had been the morning before qzmSEPqzm. 
 he greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated himself at his desk  his red beard streaming down on to the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  but my friends eyes were fixed upon the secretary  who stood by his masters chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  i think  your grace  that i could speak more freely in mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilders absence qzmSEPqzm. 
  the man turned a shade paler and cast a malignant glance at holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  if your grace wishes  yes  yes  you had better go qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  what have you to say  my friend waited until the door had closed behind the retreating secretary qzmSEPqzm. 
  the fact is  your grace  said he  that my colleague  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  and myself had an assurance from dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable that a reward had been offered in this case qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should like to have this confirmed from your own lips qzmSEPqzm. 
  certainly  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  it amounted  if i am correctly informed  to five thousand pounds to anyone who will tell you where your son is  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
  and another thousand to the man who will name the person or persons who keep him in custody  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
  under the latter heading is included  no doubt  not only those who may have taken him away  but also those who conspire to keep him in his present position  yes  yes  cried the duke  impatiently qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you do your work well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  you will have no reason to complain of niggardly treatment qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance of avidity which was a surprise to me  who knew his frugal tastes qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fancy that i see your graces chequebook upon the table  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should be glad if you would make me out a cheque for six thousand pounds qzmSEPqzm. 
 it would be as well  perhaps  for you to cross it qzmSEPqzm. 
 the capital and counties bank  oxford street branch  are my agents qzmSEPqzm. 
  his grace sat very stern and upright in his chair  and looked stonily at my friend qzmSEPqzm. 
  is this a joke  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes it is hardly a subject for pleasantry qzmSEPqzm. 
  not at all  your grace qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was never more earnest in my life qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you mean  then  i mean that i have earned the reward qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know where your son is  and i know some  at least  of those who are holding him qzmSEPqzm. 
  the dukes beard had turned more aggressively red than ever against his ghastly white face qzmSEPqzm. 
  where is he he gasped qzmSEPqzm. 
  he is  or was last night  at the fighting cock inn  about two miles from your park gate qzmSEPqzm. 
  the duke fell back in his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  and whom do you accuse  sherlock holmess answer was an astounding one qzmSEPqzm. 
 he stepped swiftly forward and touched the duke upon the shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  i accuse you  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  your grace  ill trouble you for that cheque qzmSEPqzm. 
  never shall i forget the dukes appearance as he sprang up and clawed with his hands like one who is sinking into an abyss qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  with an extraordinary effort of aristocratic selfcommand  he sat down and sank his face in his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was some minutes before he spoke qzmSEPqzm. 
  how much do you know he asked at last  without raising his head qzmSEPqzm. 
  i saw you together last night qzmSEPqzm. 
  does anyone else besides your friend know  i have spoken to no one qzmSEPqzm. 
  the duke took a pen in his quivering fingers and opened his chequebook qzmSEPqzm. 
  i shall be as good as my word  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am about to write your cheque  however unwelcome the information which you have gained may be to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 when the offer was first made i little thought the turn which events might take qzmSEPqzm. 
 but you and your friend are men of discretion  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i hardly understand your grace qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must put it plainly  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 if only you two know of this incident  there is no reason why it should go any farther qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think twelve thousand pounds is the sum that i owe you  is it not  but holmes smiled and shook his head qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fear  your grace  that matters can hardly be arranged so easily qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted for qzmSEPqzm. 
  but james knew nothing of that qzmSEPqzm. 
 you cannot hold him responsible for that qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had the misfortune to employ qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must take the view  your grace  that when a man embarks upon a crime he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring from it qzmSEPqzm. 
  morally  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt you are right qzmSEPqzm. 
 but surely not in the eyes of the law qzmSEPqzm. 
 a man cannot be condemned for a murder at which he was not present  and which he loathes and abhors as much as you do qzmSEPqzm. 
 the instant that he heard of it he made a complete confession to me  so filled was he with horror and remorse qzmSEPqzm. 
 he lost not an hour in breaking entirely with the murderer qzmSEPqzm. 
 oh  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you must save himyou must save him i tell you that you must save him the duke had dropped the last attempt at selfcommand  and was pacing the room with a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the air qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last he mastered himself and sat down once more at his desk qzmSEPqzm. 
 i appreciate your conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyone else  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 at least  we may take counsel how far we can minimize this hideous scandal qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  your grace  that this can only be done by absolute and complete frankness between us qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am disposed to help your grace to the best of my ability  but in order to do so i must understand to the last detail how the matter stands qzmSEPqzm. 
 i realize that your words applied to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder  and that he is not the murderer qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  the murderer has escaped qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes smiled demurely qzmSEPqzm. 
  your grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which i possess  or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape me qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 reuben hayes was arrested at chesterfield on my information at eleven oclock last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had a telegram from the head of the local police before i left the school this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  the duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at my friend qzmSEPqzm. 
  you seem to have powers that are hardly human  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 so reuben hayes is taken i am right glad to hear it  if it will not react upon the fate of james qzmSEPqzm. 
  your secretary  no  sir  my son qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was holmess turn to look astonished qzmSEPqzm. 
  i confess that this is entirely new to me  your grace qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must beg you to be more explicit qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will conceal nothing from you qzmSEPqzm. 
 i agree with you that complete frankness  however painful it may be to me  is the best policy in this desperate situation to which jamess folly and jealousy have reduced us qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i was a very young man  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i loved with such a love as comes only once in a lifetime qzmSEPqzm. 
 i offered the lady marriage  but she refused it on the grounds that such a match might mar my career qzmSEPqzm. 
 had she lived i would certainly never have married anyone else qzmSEPqzm. 
 she died  and left this one child  whom for her sake i have cherished and cared for qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not acknowledge the paternity to the world  but i gave him the best of educations  and since he came to manhood i have kept him near my person qzmSEPqzm. 
 he surprised my secret  and has presumed ever since upon the claim which he has upon me and upon his power of provoking a scandal  which would be abhorrent to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 his presence had something to do with the unhappy issue of my marriage qzmSEPqzm. 
 above all  he hated my young legitimate heir from the first with a persistent hatred qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may well ask me why  under these circumstances  i still kept james under my roof qzmSEPqzm. 
 i answer that it was because i could see his mothers face in his  and that for her dear sake there was no end to my longsuffering qzmSEPqzm. 
 all her pretty ways  toothere was not one of them which he could not suggest and bring back to my memory qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not send him away qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i feared so much lest he should do arthurthat is  lord saltirea mischief that i dispatched him for safety to dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtables school qzmSEPqzm. 
  james came into contact with this fellow hayes because the man was a tenant of mine  and james acted as agent qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fellow was a rascal from the beginning  but in some extraordinary way james became intimate with him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had always a taste for low company qzmSEPqzm. 
 when james determined to kidnap lord saltire it was of this mans service that he availed himself qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember that i wrote to arthur upon that last day qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  james opened the letter and inserted a note asking arthur to meet him in a little wood called the ragged shaw  which is near to the school qzmSEPqzm. 
 he used the duchesss name  and in that way got the boy to come qzmSEPqzm. 
 that evening james bicycled overi am telling you what he has himself confessed to meand he told arthur  whom he met in the wood  that his mother longed to see him  that she was awaiting him on the moor  and that if he would come back into the wood at midnight he would find a man with a horse  who would take him to her qzmSEPqzm. 
 poor arthur fell into the trap qzmSEPqzm. 
 he came to the appointment and found this fellow hayes with a led pony qzmSEPqzm. 
 arthur mounted  and they set off together qzmSEPqzm. 
 it appearsthough this james only heard yesterdaythat they were pursued  that hayes struck the pursuer with his stick  and that the man died of his injuries qzmSEPqzm. 
 hayes brought arthur to his publichouse  the fighting cock  where he was confined in an upper room  under the care of mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hayes  who is a kindly woman  but entirely under the control of her brutal husband qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that was the state of affairs when i first saw you two days ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had no more idea of the truth than you qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will ask me what was jamess motive in doing such a deed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i answer that there was a great deal which was unreasoning and fanatical in the hatred which he bore my heir qzmSEPqzm. 
 in his view he should himself have been heir of all my estates  and he deeply resented those social laws which made it impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time he had a definite motive also qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was eager that i should break the entail  and he was of opinion that it lay in my power to do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 he intended to make a bargain with meto restore arthur if i would break the entail  and so make it possible for the estate to be left to him by will qzmSEPqzm. 
 he knew well that i should never willingly invoke the aid of the police against him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i say that he would have proposed such a bargain to me  but he did not actually do so  for events moved too quickly for him  and he had not time to put his plans into practice qzmSEPqzm. 
  what brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery of this man heideggers dead body qzmSEPqzm. 
 james was seized with horror at the news qzmSEPqzm. 
 it came to us yesterday as we sat together in this study qzmSEPqzm. 
 dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 huxtable had sent a telegram qzmSEPqzm. 
 james was so overwhelmed with grief and agitation that my suspicions  which had never been entirely absent  rose instantly to a certainty  and i taxed him with the deed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he made a complete voluntary confession qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he implored me to keep his secret for three days longer  so as to give his wretched accomplice a chance of saving his guilty life qzmSEPqzm. 
 i yieldedas i have always yieldedto his prayers  and instantly james hurried off to the fighting cock to warn hayes and give him the means of flight qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not go there by daylight without provoking comment  but as soon as night fell i hurried off to see my dear arthur qzmSEPqzm. 
 i found him safe and well  but horrified beyond expression by the dreadful deed he had witnessed qzmSEPqzm. 
 in deference to my promise  and much against my will  i consented to leave him there for three days under the charge of mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hayes  since it was evident that it was impossible to inform the police where he was without telling them also who was the murderer  and i could not see how that murderer could be punished without ruin to my unfortunate james qzmSEPqzm. 
 you asked for frankness  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and i have taken you at your word  for i have now told you everything without an attempt at circumlocution or concealment qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you in turn be as frank with me qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the first place  your grace  i am bound to tell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious position in the eyes of the law qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have condoned a felony and you have aided the escape of a murderer  for i cannot doubt that any money which was taken by james wilder to aid his accomplice in his flight came from your graces purse qzmSEPqzm. 
  the duke bowed his assent qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is indeed a most serious matter qzmSEPqzm. 
 even more culpable in my opinion  your grace  is your attitude towards your younger son qzmSEPqzm. 
 you leave him in this den for three days qzmSEPqzm. 
  under solemn promises  what are promises to such people as these you have no guarantee that he will not be spirited away again qzmSEPqzm. 
 to humour your guilty elder son you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent and unnecessary danger qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a most unjustifiable action qzmSEPqzm. 
  the proud lord of holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated in his own ducal hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 the blood flushed into his high forehead  but his conscience held him dumb qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will help you  but on one condition only qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is that you ring for the footman and let me give such orders as i like qzmSEPqzm. 
  without a word the duke pressed the electric bell qzmSEPqzm. 
 a servant entered qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will be glad to hear  said holmes  that your young master is found qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is the dukes desire that the carriage shall go at once to the fighting cock inn to bring lord saltire home qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  said holmes  when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared  having secured the future  we can afford to be more lenient with the past qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am not in an official position  and there is no reason  so long as the ends of justice are served  why i should disclose all that i know qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to hayes i say nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 the gallows awaits him  and i would do nothing to save him from it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what he will divulge i cannot tell  but i have no doubt that your grace could make him understand that it is to his interest to be silent qzmSEPqzm. 
 from the police point of view he will have kidnapped the boy for the purpose of ransom qzmSEPqzm. 
 if they do not themselves find it out i see no reason why i should prompt them to take a broader point of view qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would warn your grace  however  that the continued presence of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 james wilder in your household can only lead to misfortune qzmSEPqzm. 
  i understand that  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and it is already settled that he shall leave me for ever and go to seek his fortune in australia qzmSEPqzm. 
  in that case  your grace  since you have yourself stated that any unhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence  i would suggest that you make such amends as you can to the duchess  and that you try to resume those relations which have been so unhappily interrupted qzmSEPqzm. 
  that also i have arranged  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i wrote to the duchess this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  in that case  said holmes  rising  i think that my friend and i can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from our little visit to the north qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is one other small point upon which i desire some light qzmSEPqzm. 
 this fellow hayes had shod his horses with shoes which counterfeited the tracks of cows qzmSEPqzm. 
 was it from mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 wilder that he learned so extraordinary a device  the duke stood in thought for a moment  with a look of intense surprise on his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he opened a door and showed us into a large room furnished as a museum qzmSEPqzm. 
 he led the way to a glass case in a corner  and pointed to the inscription qzmSEPqzm. 
  these shoes  it ran  were dug up in the moat of holdernesse hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 they are for the use of horses  but they are shaped below with a cloven foot of iron  so as to throw pursuers off the track qzmSEPqzm. 
 they are supposed to have belonged to some of the marauding barons of holdernesse in the middle ages qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes opened the case  and moistening his finger he passed it along the shoe qzmSEPqzm. 
 a thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you  said he  as he replaced the glass qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is the second most interesting object that i have seen in the north qzmSEPqzm. 
  and the first  holmes folded up his cheque and placed it carefully in his notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am a poor man  said he  as he patted it affectionately and thrust it into the depths of his inner pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of black peter qzmSEPqzm. 
   i have never known my friend to be in better form  both mental and physical  than in the year  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 his increasing fame had brought with it an immense practice  and i should be guilty of an indiscretion if i were even to hint at the identity of some of the illustrious clients who crossed our humble threshold in baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  however  like all great artists  lived for his arts sake  and  save in the case of the duke of holdernesse  i have seldom known him claim any large reward for his inestimable services qzmSEPqzm. 
 so unworldly was heor so capriciousthat he frequently refused his help to the powerful and wealthy where the problem made no appeal to his sympathies  while he would devote weeks of most intense application to the affairs of some humble client whose case presented those strange and dramatic qualities which appealed to his imagination and challenged his ingenuity qzmSEPqzm. 
  in this memorable year  qzmNUMqzm  a curious and incongruous succession of cases had engaged his attention  ranging from his famous investigation of the sudden death of cardinal toscaan inquiry which was carried out by him at the express desire of his holiness the popedown to his arrest of wilson  the notorious canarytrainer  which removed a plaguespot from the eastend of london qzmSEPqzm. 
 close on the heels of these two famous cases came the tragedy of woodmans lee  and the very obscure circumstances which surrounded the death of captain peter carey qzmSEPqzm. 
 no record of the doings of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes would be complete which did not include some account of this very unusual affair qzmSEPqzm. 
  during the first week of july my friend had been absent so often and so long from our lodgings that i knew he had something on hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fact that several roughlooking men called during that time and inquired for captain basil made me understand that holmes was working somewhere under one of the numerous disguises and names with which he concealed his own formidable identity qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had at least five small refuges in different parts of london in which he was able to change his personality qzmSEPqzm. 
 he said nothing of his business to me  and it was not my habit to force a confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first positive sign which he gave me of the direction which his investigation was taking was an extraordinary one qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had gone out before breakfast  and i had sat down to mine  when he strode into the room  his hat upon his head and a huge barbedheaded spear tucked like an umbrella under his arm qzmSEPqzm. 
  good gracious  holmes i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 you dont mean to say that you have been walking about london with that thing  i drove to the butchers and back qzmSEPqzm. 
  the butchers  and i return with an excellent appetite qzmSEPqzm. 
 there can be no question  my dear watson  of the value of exercise before breakfast qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i am prepared to bet that you will not guess the form that my exercise has taken qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will not attempt it qzmSEPqzm. 
  he chuckled as he poured out the coffee qzmSEPqzm. 
  if you could have looked into allardyces back shop you would have seen a dead pig swung from a hook in the ceiling  and a gentleman in his shirtsleeves furiously stabbing at it with this weapon qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was that energetic person  and i have satisfied myself that by no exertion of my strength can i transfix the pig with a single blow qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps you would care to try  not for worlds qzmSEPqzm. 
 but why were you doing this  because it seemed to me to have an indirect bearing upon the mystery of woodmans lee qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah  hopkins  i got your wire last night  and i have been expecting you qzmSEPqzm. 
 come and join us qzmSEPqzm. 
  our visitor was an exceedingly alert man  thirty years of age  dressed in a quiet tweed suit  but retaining the erect bearing of one who was accustomed to official uniform qzmSEPqzm. 
 i recognised him at once as stanley hopkins  a young police inspector for whose future holmes had high hopes  while he in turn professed the admiration and respect of a pupil for the scientific methods of the famous amateur qzmSEPqzm. 
 hopkinss brow was clouded  and he sat down with an air of deep dejection qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  thank you  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 i breakfasted before i came round qzmSEPqzm. 
 i spent the night in town  for i came up yesterday to report qzmSEPqzm. 
  and what had you to report  failure  sir  absolute failure qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have made no progress  none qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me i must have a look at the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  i wish to heavens that you would  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 its my first big chance  and i am at my wits end qzmSEPqzm. 
 for goodness sake come down and lend me a hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  it just happens that i have already read all the available evidence  including the report of the inquest  with some care qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  what do you make of that tobaccopouch found on the scene of the crime is there no clue there  hopkins looked surprised qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was the mans own pouch  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 his initials were inside it qzmSEPqzm. 
 and it was of sealskinand he an old sealer qzmSEPqzm. 
  but he had no pipe qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  sir  we could find no pipe  indeed  he smoked very little qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet he might have kept some tobacco for his friends qzmSEPqzm. 
  no doubt qzmSEPqzm. 
 i only mention it because if i had been handling the case i should have been inclined to make that the startingpoint of my investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  my friend dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson knows nothing of this matter  and i should be none the worse for hearing the sequence of events once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 just give us some short sketch of the essentials qzmSEPqzm. 
  stanley hopkins drew a slip of paper from his pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have a few dates here which will give you the career of the dead man  captain peter carey qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was born in  qzmNUMqzm fifty years of age qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a most daring and successful seal and whale fisher qzmSEPqzm. 
 in  qzmNUMqzm  he commanded the steam sealer sea unicorn  of dundee qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had then had several successful voyages in succession  and in the following year   qzmNUMqzm   he retired qzmSEPqzm. 
 after that he travelled for some years  and finally he bought a small place called woodmans lee  near forest row  in sussex qzmSEPqzm. 
 there he has lived for six years  and there he died just a week ago today qzmSEPqzm. 
  there were some most singular points about the man qzmSEPqzm. 
 in ordinary life he was a strict puritana silent  gloomy fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 his household consisted of his wife  his daughter  aged twenty  and two female servants qzmSEPqzm. 
 these last were continually changing  for it was never a very cheery situation  and sometimes it became past all bearing qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man was an intermittent drunkard  and when he had the fit on him he was a perfect fiend qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has been known to drive his wife and his daughter out of doors in the middle of the night  and flog them through the park until the whole village outside the gates was aroused by their screams qzmSEPqzm. 
  he was summoned once for a savage assault upon the old vicar  who had called upon him to remonstrate with him upon his conduct qzmSEPqzm. 
 in short  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you would go far before you found a more dangerous man than peter carey  and i have heard that he bore the same character when he commanded his ship qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was known in the trade as black peter  and the name was given him  not only on account of his swarthy features and the colour of his huge beard  but for the humours which were the terror of all around him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i need not say that he was loathed and avoided by every one of his neighbours  and that i have not heard one single word of sorrow about his terrible end qzmSEPqzm. 
  you must have read in the account of the inquest about the mans cabin  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  but perhaps your friend here has not heard of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had built himself a wooden outhousehe always called it the cabina few hundred yards from his house  and it was here that he slept every night qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a little  singleroomed hut  sixteen feet by ten qzmSEPqzm. 
 he kept the key in his pocket  made his own bed  cleaned it himself  and allowed no other foot to cross the threshold qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are small windows on each side  which were covered by curtains and never opened qzmSEPqzm. 
 one of these windows was turned towards the high road  and when the light burned in it at night the folk used to point it out to each other and wonder what black peter was doing in there qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats the window  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  which gave us one of the few bits of positive evidence that came out at the inquest qzmSEPqzm. 
  you remember that a stonemason  named slater  walking from forest row about one oclock in the morningtwo days before the murderstopped as he passed the grounds and looked at the square of light still shining among the trees qzmSEPqzm. 
 he swears that the shadow of a mans head turned sideways was clearly visible on the blind  and that this shadow was certainly not that of peter carey  whom he knew well qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was that of a bearded man  but the beard was short and bristled forwards in a way very different from that of the captain qzmSEPqzm. 
 so he says  but he had been two hours in the publichouse  and it is some distance from the road to the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  this refers to the monday  and the crime was done upon the wednesday qzmSEPqzm. 
  on the tuesday peter carey was in one of his blackest moods  flushed with drink and as savage as a dangerous wild beast qzmSEPqzm. 
 he roamed about the house  and the women ran for it when they heard him coming qzmSEPqzm. 
 late in the evening he went down to his own hut qzmSEPqzm. 
 about two oclock the following morning his daughter  who slept with her window open  heard a most fearful yell from that direction  but it was no unusual thing for him to bawl and shout when he was in drink  so no notice was taken qzmSEPqzm. 
 on rising at seven one of the maids noticed that the door of the hut was open  but so great was the terror which the man caused that it was midday before anyone would venture down to see what had become of him qzmSEPqzm. 
 peeping into the open door they saw a sight which sent them flying with white faces into the village qzmSEPqzm. 
 within an hour i was on the spot and had taken over the case qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i have fairly steady nerves  as you know  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  but i give you my word that i got a shake when i put my head into that little house qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was droning like a harmonium with the flies and bluebottles  and the floor and walls were like a slaughterhouse qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had called it a cabin  and a cabin it was sure enough  for you would have thought that you were in a ship qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a bunk at one end  a seachest  maps and charts  a picture of the sea unicorn  a line of logbooks on a shelf  all exactly as one would expect to find it in a captains room qzmSEPqzm. 
 and there in the middle of it was the man himself  his face twisted like a lost soul in torment  and his great brindled beard stuck upwards in his agony qzmSEPqzm. 
 right through his broad breast a steel harpoon had been driven  and it had sunk deep into the wood of the wall behind him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was pinned like a beetle on a card qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  he was quite dead  and had been so from the instant that he had uttered that last yell of agony qzmSEPqzm. 
  i know your methods  sir  and i applied them qzmSEPqzm. 
 before i permitted anything to be moved i examined most carefully the ground outside  and also the floor of the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were no footmarks qzmSEPqzm. 
  meaning that you saw none  i assure you  sir  that there were none qzmSEPqzm. 
  my good hopkins  i have investigated many crimes  but i have never yet seen one which was committed by a flying creature qzmSEPqzm. 
 as long as the criminal remains upon two legs so long must there be some indentation  some abrasion  some trifling displacement which can be detected by the scientific searcher qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is incredible that this bloodbespattered room contained no trace which could have aided us qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understand  however  from the inquest that there were some objects which you failed to overlook  the young inspector winced at my companions ironical comments qzmSEPqzm. 
  i was a fool not to call you in at the time  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  thats past praying for now qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  there were several objects in the room which called for special attention qzmSEPqzm. 
 one was the harpoon with which the deed was committed qzmSEPqzm. 
 it had been snatched down from a rack on the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 two others remained there  and there was a vacant place for the third qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the stock was engraved ss qzmSEPqzm. 
 sea unicorn  dundee qzmSEPqzm. 
 this seemed to establish that the crime had been done in a moment of fury  and that the murderer had seized the first weapon which came in his way qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fact that the crime was committed at two in the morning  and yet peter carey was fully dressed  suggested that he had an appointment with the murderer  which is borne out by the fact that a bottle of rum and two dirty glasses stood upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  said holmes  i think that both inferences are permissible qzmSEPqzm. 
 was there any other spirit but rum in the room  yes  there was a tantalus containing brandy and whisky on the seachest qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is of no importance to us  however  since the decanters were full  and it had therefore not been used qzmSEPqzm. 
  for all that its presence has some significance  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  let us hear some more about the objects which do seem to you to bear upon the case qzmSEPqzm. 
  there was this tobaccopouch upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  what part of the table  it lay in the middle qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was of coarse sealskinthe straighthaired skin  with a leather thong to bind it qzmSEPqzm. 
 inside was p qzmSEPqzm. 
c qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the flap qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was half an ounce of strong ships tobacco in it qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent what more  stanley hopkins drew from his pocket a drabcovered notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 the outside was rough and worn  the leaves discoloured qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the first page were written the initials j qzmSEPqzm. 
h qzmSEPqzm. 
n qzmSEPqzm. 
 and the date  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes laid it on the table and examined it in his minute way  while hopkins and i gazed over each shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the second page were the printed letters c qzmSEPqzm. 
p qzmSEPqzm. 
r qzmSEPqzm. 
  and then came several sheets of numbers qzmSEPqzm. 
 another heading was argentine  another costa rica  and another san paulo  each with pages of signs and figures after it qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you make of these asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  they appear to be lists of stock exchange securities qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought that j qzmSEPqzm. 
h qzmSEPqzm. 
n qzmSEPqzm. 
 were the initials of a broker  and that c qzmSEPqzm. 
p qzmSEPqzm. 
r qzmSEPqzm. 
 may have been his client qzmSEPqzm. 
  try canadian pacific railway  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  stanley hopkins swore between his teeth and struck his thigh with his clenched hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  what a fool i have been he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  it is as you say qzmSEPqzm. 
 then j qzmSEPqzm. 
h qzmSEPqzm. 
n qzmSEPqzm. 
 are the only initials we have to solve qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have already examined the old stock exchange lists  and i can find no one in  qzmNUMqzm  either in the house or among the outside brokers whose initials correspond with these qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet i feel that the clue is the most important one that i hold qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will admit  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that there is a possibility that these initials are those of the second person who was presentin other words  of the murderer qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would also urge that the introduction into the case of a document relating to large masses of valuable securities gives us for the first time some indication of a motive for the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmess face showed that he was thoroughly taken aback by this new development qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must admit both your points  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess that this notebook  which did not appear at the inquest  modifies any views which i may have formed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had come to a theory of the crime in which i can find no place for this qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you endeavoured to trace any of the securities here mentioned  inquiries are now being made at the offices  but i fear that the complete register of the stockholders of these south american concerns is in south america  and that some weeks must elapse before we can trace the shares qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes had been examining the cover of the notebook with his magnifying lens qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely there is some discolouration here  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  it is a bloodstain qzmSEPqzm. 
 i told you that i picked the book off the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
  was the bloodstain above or below  on the side next the boards qzmSEPqzm. 
  which proves  of course  that the book was dropped after the crime was committed qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i appreciated that point  and i conjectured that it was dropped by the murderer in his hurried flight qzmSEPqzm. 
 it lay near the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  i suppose that none of these securities have been found among the property of the dead man  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you any reason to suspect robbery  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing seemed to have been touched qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me  it is certainly a very interesting case qzmSEPqzm. 
 then there was a knife  was there not  a sheathknife  still in its sheath qzmSEPqzm. 
 it lay at the feet of the dead man qzmSEPqzm. 
 mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 carey has identified it as being her husbands property qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes was lost in thought for some time qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said he  at last  i suppose i shall have to come out and have a look at it qzmSEPqzm. 
  stanley hopkins gave a cry of joy qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 that will indeed be a weight off my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes shook his finger at the inspector qzmSEPqzm. 
  it would have been an easier task a week ago  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 but even now my visit may not be entirely fruitless qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  if you can spare the time i should be very glad of your company qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you will call a fourwheeler  hopkins  we shall be ready to start for forest row in a quarter of an hour qzmSEPqzm. 
   alighting at the small wayside station  we drove for some miles through the remains of widespread woods  which were once part of that great forest which for so long held the saxon invaders at baythe impenetrable weald  for sixty years the bulwark of britain qzmSEPqzm. 
 vast sections of it have been cleared  for this is the seat of the first ironworks of the country  and the trees have been felled to smelt the ore qzmSEPqzm. 
 now the richer fields of the north have absorbed the trade  and nothing save these ravaged groves and great scars in the earth show the work of the past qzmSEPqzm. 
 here in a clearing upon the green slope of a hill stood a long  low stone house  approached by a curving drive running through the fields qzmSEPqzm. 
 nearer the road  and surrounded on three sides by bushes  was a small outhouse  one window and the door facing in our direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the scene of the murder  stanley hopkins led us first to the house  where he introduced us to a haggard  greyhaired woman  the widow of the murdered man  whose gaunt and deeplined face  with the furtive look of terror in the depths of her redrimmed eyes  told of the years of hardship and illusage which she had endured qzmSEPqzm. 
 with her was her daughter  a pale  fairhaired girl  whose eyes blazed defiantly at us as she told us that she was glad that her father was dead  and that she blessed the hand which had struck him down qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a terrible household that black peter carey had made for himself  and it was with a sense of relief that we found ourselves in the sunlight again and making our way along a path which had been worn across the fields by the feet of the dead man qzmSEPqzm. 
  the outhouse was the simplest of dwellings  woodenwalled  shingleroofed  one window beside the door and one on the farther side qzmSEPqzm. 
 stanley hopkins drew the key from his pocket  and had stooped to the lock  when he paused with a look of attention and surprise upon his face qzmSEPqzm. 
  someone has been tampering with it  he said qzmSEPqzm. 
  there could be no doubt of the fact qzmSEPqzm. 
 the woodwork was cut and the scratches showed white through the paint  as if they had been that instant done qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes had been examining the window qzmSEPqzm. 
  someone has tried to force this also qzmSEPqzm. 
 whoever it was has failed to make his way in qzmSEPqzm. 
 he must have been a very poor burglar qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is a most extraordinary thing  said the inspector  i could swear that these marks were not here yesterday evening qzmSEPqzm. 
  some curious person from the village  perhaps  i suggested qzmSEPqzm. 
  very unlikely qzmSEPqzm. 
 few of them would dare to set foot in the grounds  far less try to force their way into the cabin qzmSEPqzm. 
 what do you think of it  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i think that fortune is very kind to us qzmSEPqzm. 
  you mean that the person will come again  it is very probable qzmSEPqzm. 
 he came expecting to find the door open qzmSEPqzm. 
 he tried to get in with the blade of a very small penknife qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could not manage it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what would he do  come again next night with a more useful tool qzmSEPqzm. 
  so i should say qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will be our fault if we are not there to receive him qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  let me see the inside of the cabin qzmSEPqzm. 
  the traces of the tragedy had been removed  but the furniture within the little room still stood as it had been on the night of the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 for two hours  with most intense concentration  holmes examined every object in turn  but his face showed that his quest was not a successful one qzmSEPqzm. 
 once only he paused in his patient investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you taken anything off this shelf  hopkins  no  i have moved nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
  something has been taken qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is less dust in this corner of the shelf than elsewhere qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may have been a book lying on its side qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may have been a box qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  i can do nothing more qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us walk in these beautiful woods  watson  and give a few hours to the birds and the flowers qzmSEPqzm. 
 we shall meet you here later  hopkins  and see if we can come to closer quarters with the gentleman who has paid this visit in the night qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was past eleven oclock when we formed our little ambuscade qzmSEPqzm. 
 hopkins was for leaving the door of the hut open  but holmes was of the opinion that this would rouse the suspicions of the stranger qzmSEPqzm. 
 the lock was a perfectly simple one  and only a strong blade was needed to push it back qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes also suggested that we should wait  not inside the hut  but outside it among the bushes which grew round the farther window qzmSEPqzm. 
 in this way we should be able to watch our man if he struck a light  and see what his object was in this stealthy nocturnal visit qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a long and melancholy vigil  and yet brought with it something of the thrill which the hunter feels when he lies beside the water pool and waits for the coming of the thirsty beast of prey qzmSEPqzm. 
 what savage creature was it which might steal upon us out of the darkness was it a fierce tiger of crime  which could only be taken fighting hard with flashing fang and claw  or would it prove to be some skulking jackal  dangerous only to the weak and unguarded  in absolute silence we crouched amongst the bushes  waiting for whatever might come qzmSEPqzm. 
 at first the steps of a few belated villagers  or the sound of voices from the village  lightened our vigil  but one by one these interruptions died away and an absolute stillness fell upon us  save for the chimes of the distant church  which told us of the progress of the night  and for the rustle and whisper of a fine rain falling amid the foliage which roofed us in qzmSEPqzm. 
  halfpast two had chimed  and it was the darkest hour which precedes the dawn  when we all started as a low but sharp click came from the direction of the gate qzmSEPqzm. 
 someone had entered the drive qzmSEPqzm. 
 again there was a long silence  and i had begun to fear that it was a false alarm  when a stealthy step was heard upon the other side of the hut  and a moment later a metallic scraping and clinking qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man was trying to force the lock this time his skill was greater or his tool was better  for there was a sudden snap and the creak of the hinges qzmSEPqzm. 
 then a match was struck  and next instant the steady light from a candle filled the interior of the hut qzmSEPqzm. 
 through the gauze curtain our eyes were all riveted upon the scene within qzmSEPqzm. 
  the nocturnal visitor was a young man  frail and thin  with a black moustache which intensified the deadly pallor of his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could not have been much above twenty years of age qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have never seen any human being who appeared to be in such a pitiable fright  for his teeth were visibly chattering and he was shaking in every limb qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was dressed like a gentleman  in norfolk jacket and knickerbockers  with a cloth cap upon his head qzmSEPqzm. 
 we watched him staring round with frightened eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he laid the candleend upon the table and disappeared from our view into one of the corners qzmSEPqzm. 
 he returned with a large book  one of the logbooks which formed a line upon the shelves qzmSEPqzm. 
 leaning on the table he rapidly turned over the leaves of this volume until he came to the entry which he sought qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  with an angry gesture of his clenched hand  he closed the book  replaced it in the corner  and put out the light qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had hardly turned to leave the hut when hopkinss hand was on the fellows collar  and i heard his loud gasp of terror as he understood that he was taken qzmSEPqzm. 
 the candle was relit  and there was our wretched captive shivering and cowering in the grasp of the detective qzmSEPqzm. 
 he sank down upon the seachest  and looked helplessly from one of us to the other qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  my fine fellow  said stanley hopkins  who are you  and what do you want here  the man pulled himself together and faced us with an effort at selfcomposure qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are detectives  i suppose said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 you imagine i am connected with the death of captain peter carey qzmSEPqzm. 
 i assure you that i am innocent qzmSEPqzm. 
  well see about that  said hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 first of all  what is your name  it is john hopley neligan qzmSEPqzm. 
  i saw holmes and hopkins exchange a quick glance qzmSEPqzm. 
  what are you doing here  can i speak confidentially  no  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  why should i tell you  if you have no answer it may go badly with you at the trial qzmSEPqzm. 
  the young man winced qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i will tell you  he said qzmSEPqzm. 
 why should i not and yet i hate to think of this old scandal gaining a new lease of life qzmSEPqzm. 
 did you ever hear of dawson and neligan  i could see from hopkinss face that he never had  but holmes was keenly interested qzmSEPqzm. 
  you mean the westcountry bankers  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 they failed for a million  ruined half the county families of cornwall  and neligan disappeared qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 neligan was my father qzmSEPqzm. 
  at last we were getting something positive  and yet it seemed a long gap between an absconding banker and captain peter carey pinned against the wall with one of his own harpoons qzmSEPqzm. 
 we all listened intently to the young mans words qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was my father who was really concerned qzmSEPqzm. 
 dawson had retired qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was only ten years of age at the time  but i was old enough to feel the shame and horror of it all qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has always been said that my father stole all the securities and fled qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is not true qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was his belief that if he were given time in which to realize them all would be well and every creditor paid in full qzmSEPqzm. 
 he started in his little yacht for norway just before the warrant was issued for his arrest qzmSEPqzm. 
 i can remember that last night when he bade farewell to my mother qzmSEPqzm. 
 he left us a list of the securities he was taking  and he swore that he would come back with his honour cleared  and that none who had trusted him would suffer qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  no word was ever heard from him again qzmSEPqzm. 
 both the yacht and he vanished utterly qzmSEPqzm. 
 we believed  my mother and i  that he and it  with the securities that he had taken with him  were at the bottom of the sea qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had a faithful friend  however  who is a business man  and it was he who discovered some time ago that some of the securities which my father had with him have reappeared on the london market qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can imagine our amazement qzmSEPqzm. 
 i spent months in trying to trace them  and at last  after many doublings and difficulties  i discovered that the original seller had been captain peter carey  the owner of this hut qzmSEPqzm. 
  naturally  i made some inquiries about the man qzmSEPqzm. 
 i found that he had been in command of a whaler which was due to return from the arctic seas at the very time when my father was crossing to norway qzmSEPqzm. 
 the autumn of that year was a stormy one  and there was a long succession of southerly gales qzmSEPqzm. 
 my fathers yacht may well have been blown to the north  and there met by captain peter careys ship qzmSEPqzm. 
 if that were so  what had become of my father in any case  if i could prove from peter careys evidence how these securities came on the market it would be a proof that my father had not sold them  and that he had no view to personal profit when he took them qzmSEPqzm. 
  i came down to sussex with the intention of seeing the captain  but it was at this moment that his terrible death occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
 i read at the inquest a description of his cabin  in which it stated that the old logbooks of his vessel were preserved in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it struck me that if i could see what occurred in the month of august   qzmNUMqzm   on board the sea unicorn  i might settle the mystery of my fathers fate qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tried last night to get at these logbooks  but was unable to open the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 tonight i tried again  and succeeded  but i find that the pages which deal with that month have been torn from the book qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was at that moment i found myself a prisoner in your hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  is that all asked hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  that is all qzmSEPqzm. 
 his eyes shifted as he said it qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have nothing else to tell us  he hesitated qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  there is nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have not been here before last night  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  then how do you account for that cried hopkins  as he held up the damning notebook  with the initials of our prisoner on the first leaf and the bloodstain on the cover qzmSEPqzm. 
  the wretched man collapsed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he sank his face in his hands and trembled all over qzmSEPqzm. 
  where did you get it he groaned qzmSEPqzm. 
 i did not know qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought i had lost it at the hotel qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is enough  said hopkins  sternly qzmSEPqzm. 
 whatever else you have to say you must say in court qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will walk down with me now to the policestation qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i am very much obliged to you and to your friend for coming down to help me qzmSEPqzm. 
 as it turns out your presence was unnecessary  and i would have brought the case to this successful issue without you  but none the less i am very grateful qzmSEPqzm. 
 rooms have been reserved for you at the brambletye hotel  so we can all walk down to the village together qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  watson  what do you think of it asked holmes  as we travelled back next morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  i can see that you are not satisfied qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  yes  my dear watson  i am perfectly satisfied qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time stanley hopkinss methods do not commend themselves to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am disappointed in stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had hoped for better things from him qzmSEPqzm. 
 one should always look for a possible alternative and provide against it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is the first rule of criminal investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
  what  then  is the alternative  the line of investigation which i have myself been pursuing qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may give us nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cannot tell qzmSEPqzm. 
 but at least i shall follow it to the end qzmSEPqzm. 
  several letters were waiting for holmes at baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 he snatched one of them up  opened it  and burst out into a triumphant chuckle of laughter qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 the alternative develops qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you telegraph forms just write a couple of messages for me sumner  shipping agent  ratcliff highway qzmSEPqzm. 
 send three men on  to arrive ten tomorrow morning qzmSEPqzm. 
basil qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats my name in those parts qzmSEPqzm. 
 the other is inspector stanley hopkins   qzmNUMqzm   lord street  brixton qzmSEPqzm. 
 come breakfast tomorrow at ninethirty qzmSEPqzm. 
 important qzmSEPqzm. 
 wire if unable to come qzmSEPqzm. 
sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 there  watson  this infernal case has haunted me for ten days qzmSEPqzm. 
 i hereby banish it completely from my presence qzmSEPqzm. 
 tomorrow i trust that we shall hear the last of it for ever qzmSEPqzm. 
  sharp at the hour named inspector stanley hopkins appeared  and we sat down together to the excellent breakfast which mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson had prepared qzmSEPqzm. 
 the young detective was in high spirits at his success qzmSEPqzm. 
  you really think that your solution must be correct asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could not imagine a more complete case qzmSEPqzm. 
  it did not seem to me conclusive qzmSEPqzm. 
  you astonish me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 what more could one ask for  does your explanation cover every point  undoubtedly qzmSEPqzm. 
 i find that young neligan arrived at the brambletye hotel on the very day of the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 he came on the pretence of playing golf qzmSEPqzm. 
 his room was on the groundfloor  and he could get out when he liked qzmSEPqzm. 
 that very night he went down to woodmans lee  saw peter carey at the hut  quarrelled with him  and killed him with the harpoon qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  horrified by what he had done  he fled out of the hut  dropping the notebook which he had brought with him in order to question peter carey about these different securities qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may have observed that some of them were marked with ticks  and the othersthe great majoritywere not qzmSEPqzm. 
 those which are ticked have been traced on the london market  but the others presumably were still in the possession of carey  and young neligan  according to his own account  was anxious to recover them in order to do the right thing by his fathers creditors qzmSEPqzm. 
 after his flight he did not dare to approach the hut again for some time  but at last he forced himself to do so in order to obtain the information which he needed qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely that is all simple and obvious  holmes smiled and shook his head qzmSEPqzm. 
  it seems to me to have only one drawback  hopkins  and that is that it is intrinsically impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you tried to drive a harpoon through a body no tut  tut  my dear sir  you must really pay attention to these details qzmSEPqzm. 
 my friend watson could tell you that i spent a whole morning in that exercise qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is no easy matter  and requires a strong and practised arm qzmSEPqzm. 
 but this blow was delivered with such violence that the head of the weapon sank deep into the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you imagine that this anaemic youth was capable of so frightful an assault is he the man who hobnobbed in rum and water with black peter in the dead of the night was it his profile that was seen on the blind two nights before no  no  hopkins  it is another and a more formidable person for whom we must seek qzmSEPqzm. 
  the detectives face had grown longer and longer during holmess speech qzmSEPqzm. 
 his hopes and his ambitions were all crumbling about him qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he would not abandon his position without a struggle qzmSEPqzm. 
  you cant deny that neligan was present that night  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the book will prove that qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fancy that i have evidence enough to satisfy a jury  even if you are able to pick a hole in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i have laid my hand upon my man qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to this terrible person of yours  where is he  i rather fancy that he is on the stair  said holmes  serenely qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  watson  that you would do well to put that revolver where you can reach it qzmSEPqzm. 
 he rose  and laid a written paper upon a sidetable qzmSEPqzm. 
 now we are ready  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  there had been some talking in gruff voices outside  and now mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson opened the door to say that there were three men inquiring for captain basil qzmSEPqzm. 
  show them in one by one  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  the first who entered was a little ribstonpippin of a man  with ruddy cheeks and fluffy white sidewhiskers qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes had drawn a letter from his pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  what name he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  james lancaster qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sorry  lancaster  but the berth is full qzmSEPqzm. 
 here is half a sovereign for your trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
 just step into this room and wait there for a few minutes qzmSEPqzm. 
  the second man was a long  driedup creature  with lank hair and sallow cheeks qzmSEPqzm. 
 his name was hugh pattins qzmSEPqzm. 
 he also received his dismissal  his halfsovereign  and the order to wait qzmSEPqzm. 
  the third applicant was a man of remarkable appearance qzmSEPqzm. 
 a fierce bulldog face was framed in a tangle of hair and beard  and two bold dark eyes gleamed behind the cover of thick  tufted  overhung eyebrows qzmSEPqzm. 
 he saluted and stood sailorfashion  turning his cap round in his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  your name asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  patrick cairns qzmSEPqzm. 
  harpooner  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 twentysix voyages qzmSEPqzm. 
  dundee  i suppose  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  and ready to start with an exploring ship  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  what wages  eight pounds a month qzmSEPqzm. 
  could you start at once  as soon as i get my kit qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you your papers  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 he took a sheaf of worn and greasy forms from his pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes glanced over them and returned them qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are just the man i want  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 heres the agreement on the sidetable qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you sign it the whole matter will be settled qzmSEPqzm. 
  the seaman lurched across the room and took up the pen qzmSEPqzm. 
  shall i sign here he asked  stooping over the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes leaned over his shoulder and passed both hands over his neck qzmSEPqzm. 
  this will do  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  i heard a click of steel and a bellow like an enraged bull qzmSEPqzm. 
 the next instant holmes and the seaman were rolling on the ground together qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a man of such gigantic strength that  even with the handcuffs which holmes had so deftly fastened upon his wrists  he would have very quickly overpowered my friend had hopkins and i not rushed to his rescue qzmSEPqzm. 
 only when i pressed the cold muzzle of the revolver to his temple did he at last understand that resistance was vain qzmSEPqzm. 
 we lashed his ankles with cord and rose breathless from the struggle qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must really apologize  hopkins  said sherlock holmes  i fear that the scrambled eggs are cold qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  you will enjoy the rest of your breakfast all the better  will you not  for the thought that you have brought your case to a triumphant conclusion qzmSEPqzm. 
  stanley hopkins was speechless with amazement qzmSEPqzm. 
  i dont know what to say  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  he blurted out at last  with a very red face qzmSEPqzm. 
 it seems to me that i have been making a fool of myself from the beginning qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understand now  what i should never have forgotten  that i am the pupil and you are the master qzmSEPqzm. 
 even now i see what you have done  but i dont know how you did it  or what it signifies qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  said holmes  goodhumouredly qzmSEPqzm. 
 we all learn by experience  and your lesson this time is that you should never lose sight of the alternative qzmSEPqzm. 
 you were so absorbed in young neligan that you could not spare a thought to patrick cairns  the true murderer of peter carey qzmSEPqzm. 
  the hoarse voice of the seaman broke in on our conversation qzmSEPqzm. 
  see here  mister  said he  i make no complaint of being manhandled in this fashion  but i would have you call things by their right names qzmSEPqzm. 
 you say i murdered peter carey  i say i killed peter carey  and theres all the difference qzmSEPqzm. 
 maybe you dont believe what i say qzmSEPqzm. 
 maybe you think i am just slinging you a yarn qzmSEPqzm. 
  not at all  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us hear what you have to say qzmSEPqzm. 
  its soon told  and  by the lord  every word of it is truth qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew black peter  and when he pulled out his knife i whipped a harpoon through him sharp  for i knew that it was him or me qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats how he died qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can call it murder qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyhow  id as soon die with a rope round my neck as with black peters knife in my heart qzmSEPqzm. 
  how came you there asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill tell it you from the beginning qzmSEPqzm. 
 just sit me up a little so as i can speak easy qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was in  qzmNUMqzm  that it happenedaugust of that year qzmSEPqzm. 
 peter carey was master of the sea unicorn  and i was spare harpooner qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were coming out of the icepack on our way home  with head winds and a weeks southerly gale  when we picked up a little craft that had been blown north qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was one man on hera landsman qzmSEPqzm. 
 the crew had thought she would founder  and had made for the norwegian coast in the dinghy qzmSEPqzm. 
 i guess they were all drowned qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  we took him on board  this man  and he and the skipper had some long talks in the cabin qzmSEPqzm. 
 all the baggage we took off with him was one tin box qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far as i know  the mans name was never mentioned  and on the second night he disappeared as if he had never been qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was given out that he had either thrown himself overboard or fallen overboard in the heavy weather that we were having qzmSEPqzm. 
 only one man knew what had happened to him  and that was me  for with my own eyes i saw the skipper tip up his heels and put him over the rail in the middle watch of a dark night  two days before we sighted the shetland lights qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i kept my knowledge to myself and waited to see what would come of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 when we got back to scotland it was easily hushed up  and nobody asked any questions qzmSEPqzm. 
 a stranger died by an accident  and it was nobodys business to inquire qzmSEPqzm. 
 shortly after peter carey gave up the sea  and it was long years before i could find where he was qzmSEPqzm. 
 i guessed that he had done the deed for the sake of what was in that tin box  and that he could afford now to pay me well for keeping my mouth shut qzmSEPqzm. 
  i found out where he was through a sailor man that had met him in london  and down i went to squeeze him qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first night he was reasonable enough  and was ready to give me what would make me free of the sea for life qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were to fix it all two nights later qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i came i found him three parts drunk and in a vile temper qzmSEPqzm. 
 we sat down and we drank and we yarned about old times  but the more he drank the less i liked the look on his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 i spotted that harpoon upon the wall  and i thought i might need it before i was through qzmSEPqzm. 
 then at last he broke out at me  spitting and cursing  with murder in his eyes and a great claspknife in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had not time to get it from the sheath before i had the harpoon through him qzmSEPqzm. 
 heavens what a yell he gave  and his face gets between me and my sleep i stood there  with his blood splashing round me  and i waited for a bit  but all was quiet  so i took heart once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 i looked round  and there was the tin box on a shelf qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had as much right to it as peter carey  anyhow  so i took it with me and left the hut qzmSEPqzm. 
 like a fool i left my baccypouch upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  now ill tell you the queerest part of the whole story qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had hardly got outside the hut when i heard someone coming  and i hid among the bushes qzmSEPqzm. 
 a man came slinking along  went into the hut  gave a cry as if he had seen a ghost  and legged it as hard as he could run until he was out of sight qzmSEPqzm. 
 who he was or what he wanted is more than i can tell qzmSEPqzm. 
 for my part i walked ten miles  got a train at tunbridge wells  and so reached london  and no one the wiser qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  when i came to examine the box i found there was no money in it  and nothing but papers that i would not dare to sell qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had lost my hold on black peter  and was stranded in london without a shilling qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was only my trade left qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw these advertisements about harpooners and high wages  so i went to the shipping agents  and they sent me here qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats all i know  and i say again that if i killed black peter the law should give me thanks  for i saved them the price of a hempen rope qzmSEPqzm. 
  a very clear statement  said holmes  rising and lighting his pipe qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  hopkins  that you should lose no time in conveying your prisoner to a place of safety qzmSEPqzm. 
 this room is not well adapted for a cell  and mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 patrick cairns occupies too large a proportion of our carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said hopkins  i do not know how to express my gratitude qzmSEPqzm. 
 even now i do not understand how you attained this result qzmSEPqzm. 
  simply by having the good fortune to get the right clue from the beginning qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is very possible if i had known about this notebook it might have led away my thoughts  as it did yours qzmSEPqzm. 
 but all i heard pointed in the one direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 the amazing strength  the skill in the use of the harpoon  the rum and water  the sealskin tobaccopouch  with the coarse tobaccoall these pointed to a seaman  and one who had been a whaler qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was convinced that the initials p qzmSEPqzm. 
c qzmSEPqzm. 
 upon the pouch were a coincidence  and not those of peter carey  since he seldom smoked  and no pipe was found in his cabin qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember that i asked whether whisky and brandy were in the cabin qzmSEPqzm. 
 you said they were qzmSEPqzm. 
 how many landsmen are there who would drink rum when they could get these other spirits yes  i was certain it was a seaman qzmSEPqzm. 
  and how did you find him  my dear sir  the problem had become a very simple one qzmSEPqzm. 
 if it were a seaman  it could only be a seaman who had been with him on the sea unicorn qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far as i could learn he had sailed in no other ship qzmSEPqzm. 
 i spent three days in wiring to dundee  and at the end of that time i had ascertained the names of the crew of the sea unicorn in  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i found patrick cairns among the harpooners my research was nearing its end qzmSEPqzm. 
 i argued that the man was probably in london  and that he would desire to leave the country for a time qzmSEPqzm. 
 i therefore spent some days in the eastend  devised an arctic expedition  put forth tempting terms for harpooners who would serve under captain basiland behold the result  wonderful cried hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 wonderful  you must obtain the release of young neligan as soon as possible  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess that i think you owe him some apology qzmSEPqzm. 
 the tin box must be returned to him  but  of course  the securities which peter carey has sold are lost for ever qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres the cab  hopkins  and you can remove your man qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you want me for the trial  my address and that of watson will be somewhere in norwayill send particulars later qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of charles augustus milverton qzmSEPqzm. 
   it is years since the incidents of which i speak took place  and yet it is with diffidence that i allude to them qzmSEPqzm. 
 for a long time  even with the utmost discretion and reticence  it would have been impossible to make the facts public  but now the principal person concerned is beyond the reach of human law  and with due suppression the story may be told in such fashion as to injure no one qzmSEPqzm. 
 it records an absolutely unique experience in the career both of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes and of myself qzmSEPqzm. 
 the reader will excuse me if i conceal the date or any other fact by which he might trace the actual occurrence qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had been out for one of our evening rambles  holmes and i  and had returned about six oclock on a cold  frosty winters evening qzmSEPqzm. 
 as holmes turned up the lamp the light fell upon a card on the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 he glanced at it  and then  with an ejaculation of disgust  threw it on the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 i picked it up and read               charles augustus milverton                    appledore towers              agent qzmSEPqzm. 
              hampstead qzmSEPqzm. 
  who is he i asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  the worst man in london  holmes answered  as he sat down and stretched his legs before the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 is anything on the back of the card  i turned it over qzmSEPqzm. 
  will call at  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmNUMqzm c qzmSEPqzm. 
a qzmSEPqzm. 
m qzmSEPqzm. 
  i read qzmSEPqzm. 
  hum hes about due qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you feel a creeping  shrinking sensation  watson  when you stand before the serpents in the zoo and see the slithery  gliding  venomous creatures  with their deadly eyes and wicked  flattened faces well  thats how milverton impresses me qzmSEPqzm. 
 ive had to do with fifty murderers in my career  but the worst of them never gave me the repulsion which i have for this fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet i cant get out of doing business with himindeed  he is here at my invitation qzmSEPqzm. 
  but who is he  ill tell you  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is the king of all the blackmailers qzmSEPqzm. 
 heaven help the man  and still more the woman  whose secret and reputation come into the power of milverton qzmSEPqzm. 
 with a smiling face and a heart of marble he will squeeze and squeeze until he has drained them dry qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fellow is a genius in his way  and would have made his mark in some more savoury trade qzmSEPqzm. 
 his method is as follows he allows it to be known that he is prepared to pay very high sums for letters which compromise people of wealth or position qzmSEPqzm. 
 he receives these wares not only from treacherous valets or maids  but frequently from genteel ruffians who have gained the confidence and affection of trusting women qzmSEPqzm. 
 he deals with no niggard hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 i happen to know that he paid seven hundred pounds to a footman for a note two lines in length  and that the ruin of a noble family was the result qzmSEPqzm. 
 everything which is in the market goes to milverton  and there are hundreds in this great city who turn white at his name qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one knows where his grip may fall  for he is far too rich and far too cunning to work from hand to mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 he will hold a card back for years in order to play it at the moment when the stake is best worth winning qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have said that he is the worst man in london  and i would ask you how could one compare the ruffian who in hot blood bludgeons his mate with this man  who methodically and at his leisure tortures the soul and wrings the nerves in order to add to his already swollen moneybags  i had seldom heard my friend speak with such intensity of feeling qzmSEPqzm. 
  but surely  said i  the fellow must be within the grasp of the law  technically  no doubt  but practically not qzmSEPqzm. 
 what would it profit a woman  for example  to get him a few months imprisonment if her own ruin must immediately follow his victims dare not hit back qzmSEPqzm. 
 if ever he blackmailed an innocent person  then  indeed  we should have him  but he is as cunning as the evil one qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  no  we must find other ways to fight him qzmSEPqzm. 
  and why is he here  because an illustrious client has placed her piteous case in my hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is the lady eva brackwell  the most beautiful debutante of last season qzmSEPqzm. 
 she is to be married in a fortnight to the earl of dovercourt qzmSEPqzm. 
 this fiend has several imprudent lettersimprudent  watson  nothing worsewhich were written to an impecunious young squire in the country qzmSEPqzm. 
 they would suffice to break off the match qzmSEPqzm. 
 milverton will send the letters to the earl unless a large sum of money is paid him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been commissioned to meet him  andto make the best terms i can qzmSEPqzm. 
  at that instant there was a clatter and a rattle in the street below qzmSEPqzm. 
 looking down i saw a stately carriage and pair  the brilliant lamps gleaming on the glossy haunches of the noble chestnuts qzmSEPqzm. 
 a footman opened the door  and a small  stout man in a shaggy astrachan overcoat descended qzmSEPqzm. 
 a minute later he was in the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  charles augustus milverton was a man of fifty  with a large  intellectual head  a round  plump  hairless face  a perpetual frozen smile  and two keen grey eyes  which gleamed brightly from behind broad  goldenrimmed glasses qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was something of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 pickwicks benevolence in his appearance  marred only by the insincerity of the fixed smile and by the hard glitter of those restless and penetrating eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 his voice was as smooth and suave as his countenance  as he advanced with a plump little hand extended  murmuring his regret for having missed us at his first visit qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes disregarded the outstretched hand and looked at him with a face of granite qzmSEPqzm. 
 milvertons smile broadened  he shrugged his shoulders  removed his overcoat  folded it with great deliberation over the back of a chair  and then took a seat qzmSEPqzm. 
  this gentleman said he  with a wave in my direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 is it discreet is it right  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson is my friend and partner qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is only in your clients interests that i protested qzmSEPqzm. 
 the matter is so very delicate  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson has already heard of it qzmSEPqzm. 
  then we can proceed to business qzmSEPqzm. 
 you say that you are acting for lady eva qzmSEPqzm. 
 has she empowered you to accept my terms  what are your terms  seven thousand pounds qzmSEPqzm. 
  and the alternative  my dear sir  it is painful for me to discuss it  but if the money is not paid on the  qzmNUMqzm th there certainly will be no marriage on the  qzmNUMqzm th qzmSEPqzm. 
  his insufferable smile was more complacent than ever qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes thought for a little qzmSEPqzm. 
  you appear to me  he said  at last  to be taking matters too much for granted qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am  of course  familiar with the contents of these letters qzmSEPqzm. 
 my client will certainly do what i may advise qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall counsel her to tell her future husband the whole story and to trust to his generosity qzmSEPqzm. 
  milverton chuckled qzmSEPqzm. 
  you evidently do not know the earl  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  from the baffled look upon holmess face i could see clearly that he did qzmSEPqzm. 
  what harm is there in the letters he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  they are sprightlyvery sprightly  milverton answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 the lady was a charming correspondent qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i can assure you that the earl of dovercourt would fail to appreciate them qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  since you think otherwise  we will let it rest at that qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is purely a matter of business qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you think that it is in the best interests of your client that these letters should be placed in the hands of the earl  then you would indeed be foolish to pay so large a sum of money to regain them qzmSEPqzm. 
  he rose and seized his astrachan coat qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes was grey with anger and mortification qzmSEPqzm. 
  wait a little  he said qzmSEPqzm. 
 you go too fast qzmSEPqzm. 
 we would certainly make every effort to avoid scandal in so delicate a matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  milverton relapsed into his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  i was sure that you would see it in that light  he purred qzmSEPqzm. 
  at the same time  holmes continued  lady eva is not a wealthy woman qzmSEPqzm. 
 i assure you that two thousand pounds would be a drain upon her resources  and that the sum you name is utterly beyond her power qzmSEPqzm. 
 i beg  therefore  that you will moderate your demands  and that you will return the letters at the price i indicate  which is  i assure you  the highest that you can get qzmSEPqzm. 
  milvertons smile broadened and his eyes twinkled humorously qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am aware that what you say is true about the ladys resources  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time  you must admit that the occasion of a ladys marriage is a very suitable time for her friends and relatives to make some little effort upon her behalf qzmSEPqzm. 
 they may hesitate as to an acceptable wedding present qzmSEPqzm. 
 let me assure them that this little bundle of letters would give more joy than all the candelabra and butterdishes in london qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is impossible  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me  dear me  how unfortunate cried milverton  taking out a bulky pocketbook qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cannot help thinking that ladies are illadvised in not making an effort qzmSEPqzm. 
 look at this he held up a little note with a coatofarms upon the envelope qzmSEPqzm. 
 that belongs towell  perhaps it is hardly fair to tell the name until tomorrow morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 but at that time it will be in the hands of the ladys husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 and all because she will not find a beggarly sum which she could get by turning her diamonds into paste qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is such a pity qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  you remember the sudden end of the engagement between the honourable miss miles and colonel dorking only two days before the wedding there was a paragraph in the morning post to say that it was all off qzmSEPqzm. 
 and why it is almost incredible  but the absurd sum of twelve hundred pounds would have settled the whole question qzmSEPqzm. 
 is it not pitiful and here i find you  a man of sense  boggling about terms when your clients future and honour are at stake qzmSEPqzm. 
 you surprise me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  what i say is true  holmes answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 the money cannot be found qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely it is better for you to take the substantial sum which i offer than to ruin this womans career  which can profit you in no way  there you make a mistake  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 an exposure would profit me indirectly to a considerable extent qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have eight or ten similar cases maturing qzmSEPqzm. 
 if it was circulated among them that i had made a severe example of the lady eva i should find all of them much more open to reason qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see my point  holmes sprang from his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  get behind him  watson dont let him out now  sir  let us see the contents of that notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
  milverton had glided as quick as a rat to the side of the room  and stood with his back against the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  he said  turning the front of his coat and exhibiting the butt of a large revolver  which projected from the inside pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been expecting you to do something original qzmSEPqzm. 
 this has been done so often  and what good has ever come from it i assure you that i am armed to the teeth  and i am perfectly prepared to use my weapons  knowing that the law will support me qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  your supposition that i would bring the letters here in a notebook is entirely mistaken qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would do nothing so foolish qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  gentlemen  i have one or two little interviews this evening  and it is a long drive to hampstead qzmSEPqzm. 
  he stepped forward  took up his coat  laid his hand on his revolver  and turned to the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 i picked up a chair  but holmes shook his head and i laid it down again qzmSEPqzm. 
 with bow  a smile  and a twinkle milverton was out of the room  and a few moments after we heard the slam of the carriage door and the rattle of the wheels as he drove away qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes sat motionless by the fire  his hands buried deep in his trouser pockets  his chin sunk upon his breast  his eyes fixed upon the glowing embers qzmSEPqzm. 
 for half an hour he was silent and still qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  with the gesture of a man who has taken his decision  he sprang to his feet and passed into his bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 a little later a rakish young workman with a goatee beard and a swagger lit his clay pipe at the lamp before descending into the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill be back some time  watson  said he  and vanished into the night qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understood that he had opened his campaign against charles augustus milverton  but i little dreamed the strange shape which that campaign was destined to take qzmSEPqzm. 
  for some days holmes came and went at all hours in this attire  but beyond a remark that his time was spent at hampstead  and that it was not wasted  i knew nothing of what he was doing qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last  however  on a wild  tempestuous evening  when the wind screamed and rattled against the windows  he returned from his last expedition  and having removed his disguise he sat before the fire and laughed heartily in his silent inward fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
  you would not call me a marrying man  watson  no  indeed  youll be interested to hear that i am engaged qzmSEPqzm. 
  my dear fellow i congrat  to milvertons housemaid qzmSEPqzm. 
  good heavens  holmes  i wanted information  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely you have gone too far  it was a most necessary step qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am a plumber with a rising business  escott by name qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have walked out with her each evening  and i have talked with her qzmSEPqzm. 
 good heavens  those talks however  i have got all i wanted qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know milvertons house as i know the palm of my hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the girl  holmes  he shrugged his shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
  you cant help it  my dear watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 you must play your cards as best you can when such a stake is on the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  i rejoice to say that i have a hated rival who will certainly cut me out the instant that my back is turned qzmSEPqzm. 
 what a splendid night it is  you like this weather  it suits my purpose qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  i mean to burgle milvertons house tonight qzmSEPqzm. 
  i had a catching of the breath  and my skin went cold at the words  which were slowly uttered in a tone of concentrated resolution qzmSEPqzm. 
 as a flash of lightning in the night shows up in an instant every detail of a wide landscape  so at one glance i seemed to see every possible result of such an actionthe detection  the capture  the honoured career ending in irreparable failure and disgrace  my friend himself lying at the mercy of the odious milverton qzmSEPqzm. 
  for heavens sake  holmes  think what you are doing  i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  my dear fellow  i have given it every consideration qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am never precipitate in my actions  nor would i adopt so energetic and indeed so dangerous a course if any other were possible qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us look at the matter clearly and fairly qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose that you will admit that the action is morally justifiable  though technically criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 to burgle his house is no more than to forcibly take his pocketbookan action in which you were prepared to aid me qzmSEPqzm. 
  i turned it over in my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  i said  it is morally justifiable so long as our object is to take no articles save those which are used for an illegal purpose qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 since it is morally justifiable i have only to consider the question of personal risk qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely a gentleman should not lay much stress upon this when a lady is in most desperate need of his help  you will be in such a false position qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  that is part of the risk qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no other possible way of regaining these letters qzmSEPqzm. 
 the unfortunate lady has not the money  and there are none of her people in whom she could confide qzmSEPqzm. 
 tomorrow is the last day of grace  and unless we can get the letters tonight this villain will be as good as his word and will bring about her ruin qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must  therefore  abandon my client to her fate or i must play this last card qzmSEPqzm. 
 between ourselves  watson  its a sporting duel between this fellow milverton and me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had  as you saw  the best of the first exchanges  but my selfrespect and my reputation are concerned to fight it to a finish qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i dont like it  but i suppose it must be  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 when do we start  you are not coming qzmSEPqzm. 
  then you are not going  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 i give you my word of honourand i never broke it in my lifethat i will take a cab straight to the policestation and give you away unless you let me share this adventure with you qzmSEPqzm. 
  you cant help me qzmSEPqzm. 
  how do you know that you cant tell what may happen qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyway  my resolution is taken qzmSEPqzm. 
 other people beside you have selfrespect and even reputations qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes had looked annoyed  but his brow cleared  and he clapped me on the shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  my dear fellow  be it so qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have shared the same room for some years  and it would be amusing if we ended by sharing the same cell qzmSEPqzm. 
 you know  watson  i dont mind confessing to you that i have always had an idea that i would have made a highly efficient criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is the chance of my lifetime in that direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 see here he took a neat little leather case out of a drawer  and opening it he exhibited a number of shining instruments qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is a firstclass  uptodate burgling kit  with nickelplated jemmy  diamondtipped glasscutter  adaptable keys  and every modern improvement which the march of civilization demands qzmSEPqzm. 
 here  too  is my dark lantern qzmSEPqzm. 
 everything is in order qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you a pair of silent shoes  i have rubbersoled tennis shoes qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent qzmSEPqzm. 
 and a mask  i can make a couple out of black silk qzmSEPqzm. 
  i can see that you have a strong natural turn for this sort of thing qzmSEPqzm. 
 very good  do you make the masks qzmSEPqzm. 
 we shall have some cold supper before we start qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is now ninethirty qzmSEPqzm. 
 at eleven we shall drive as far as church row qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a quarter of an hours walk from there to appledore towers qzmSEPqzm. 
 we shall be at work before midnight qzmSEPqzm. 
 milverton is a heavy sleeper and retires punctually at tenthirty qzmSEPqzm. 
 with any luck we should be back here by two  with the lady evas letters in my pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes and i put on our dressclothes  so that we might appear to be two theatregoers homeward bound qzmSEPqzm. 
 in oxford street we picked up a hansom and drove to an address in hampstead qzmSEPqzm. 
 here we paid off our cab  and with our greatcoats buttoned up  for it was bitterly cold and the wind seemed to blow through us  we walked along the edge of the heath qzmSEPqzm. 
  its a business that needs delicate treatment  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 these documents are contained in a safe in the fellows study  and the study is the anteroom of his bedchamber qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other hand  like all these stout  little men who do themselves well  he is a plethoric sleeper qzmSEPqzm. 
 agathathats my fianceesays it is a joke in the servants hall that its impossible to wake the master qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has a secretary who is devoted to his interests and never budges from the study all day qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats why we are going at night qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he has a beast of a dog which roams the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 i met agatha late the last two evenings  and she locks the brute up so as to give me a clear run qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is the house  this big one in its own grounds qzmSEPqzm. 
 through the gatenow to the right among the laurels qzmSEPqzm. 
 we might put on our masks here  i think qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see  there is not a glimmer of light in any of the windows  and everything is working splendidly qzmSEPqzm. 
  with our black silk facecoverings  which turned us into two of the most truculent figures in london  we stole up to the silent  gloomy house qzmSEPqzm. 
 a sort of tiled veranda extended along one side of it  lined by several windows and two doors qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats his bedroom  holmes whispered qzmSEPqzm. 
 this door opens straight into the study qzmSEPqzm. 
 it would suit us best  but it is bolted as well as locked  and we should make too much noise getting in qzmSEPqzm. 
 come round here qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres a greenhouse which opens into the drawingroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  the place was locked  but holmes removed a circle of glass and turned the key from the inside qzmSEPqzm. 
 an instant afterwards he had closed the door behind us  and we had become felons in the eyes of the law qzmSEPqzm. 
 the thick  warm air of the conservatory and the rich  choking fragrance of exotic plants took us by the throat qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seized my hand in the darkness and led me swiftly past banks of shrubs which brushed against our faces qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes had remarkable powers  carefully cultivated  of seeing in the dark qzmSEPqzm. 
 still holding my hand in one of his he opened a door  and i was vaguely conscious that we had entered a large room in which a cigar had been smoked not long before qzmSEPqzm. 
 he felt his way among the furniture  opened another door  and closed it behind us qzmSEPqzm. 
 putting out my hand i felt several coats hanging from the wall  and i understood that i was in a passage qzmSEPqzm. 
 we passed along it  and holmes very gently opened a door upon the righthand side qzmSEPqzm. 
 something rushed out at us and my heart sprang into my mouth  but i could have laughed when i realized that it was the cat qzmSEPqzm. 
 a fire was burning in this new room  and again the air was heavy with tobacco smoke qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes entered on tiptoe  waited for me to follow  and then very gently closed the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were in milvertons study  and a portiere at the farther side showed the entrance to his bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a good fire  and the room was illuminated by it qzmSEPqzm. 
 near the door i saw the gleam of an electric switch  but it was unnecessary  even if it had been safe  to turn it on qzmSEPqzm. 
 at one side of the fireplace was a heavy curtain  which covered the bay window we had seen from outside qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other side was the door which communicated with the veranda qzmSEPqzm. 
 a desk stood in the centre  with a turning chair of shining red leather qzmSEPqzm. 
 opposite was a large bookcase  with a marble bust of athene on the top qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the corner between the bookcase and the wall there stood a tall green safe  the firelight flashing back from the polished brass knobs upon its face qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes stole across and looked at it qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he crept to the door of the bedroom  and stood with slanting head listening intently qzmSEPqzm. 
 no sound came from within qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile it had struck me that it would be wise to secure our retreat through the outer door  so i examined it qzmSEPqzm. 
 to my amazement it was neither locked nor bolted i touched holmes on the arm  and he turned his masked face in that direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw him start  and he was evidently as surprised as i qzmSEPqzm. 
  i dont like it  he whispered  putting his lips to my very ear qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cant quite make it out qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyhow  we have no time to lose qzmSEPqzm. 
  can i do anything  yes  stand by the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you hear anyone come  bolt it on the inside  and we can get away as we came qzmSEPqzm. 
 if they come the other way  we can get through the door if our job is done  or hide behind these window curtains if it is not qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you understand  i nodded and stood by the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 my first feeling of fear had passed away  and i thrilled now with a keener zest than i had ever enjoyed when we were the defenders of the law instead of its defiers qzmSEPqzm. 
 the high object of our mission  the consciousness that it was unselfish and chivalrous  the villainous character of our opponent  all added to the sporting interest of the adventure qzmSEPqzm. 
 far from feeling guilty  i rejoiced and exulted in our dangers qzmSEPqzm. 
 with a glow of admiration i watched holmes unrolling his case of instruments and choosing his tool with the calm  scientific accuracy of a surgeon who performs a delicate operation qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew that the opening of safes was a particular hobby with him  and i understood the joy which it gave him to be confronted with this green and gold monster  the dragon which held in its maw the reputations of many fair ladies qzmSEPqzm. 
 turning up the cuffs of his dresscoathe had placed his overcoat on a chairholmes laid out two drills  a jemmy  and several skeleton keys qzmSEPqzm. 
 i stood at the centre door with my eyes glancing at each of the others  ready for any emergency  though  indeed  my plans were somewhat vague as to what i should do if we were interrupted qzmSEPqzm. 
 for half an hour holmes worked with concentrated energy  laying down one tool  picking up another  handling each with the strength and delicacy of the trained mechanic qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally i heard a click  the broad green door swung open  and inside i had a glimpse of a number of paper packets  each tied  sealed  and inscribed qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes picked one out  but it was hard to read by the flickering fire  and he drew out his little dark lantern  for it was too dangerous  with milverton in the next room  to switch on the electric light qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly i saw him halt  listen intently  and then in an instant he had swung the door of the safe to  picked up his coat  stuffed his tools into the pockets  and darted behind the window curtain  motioning me to do the same qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was only when i had joined him there that i heard what had alarmed his quicker senses qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a noise somewhere within the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 a door slammed in the distance qzmSEPqzm. 
 then a confused  dull murmur broke itself into the measured thud of heavy footsteps rapidly approaching qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were in the passage outside the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 they paused at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 the door opened qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a sharp snick as the electric light was turned on qzmSEPqzm. 
 the door closed once more  and the pungent reek of a strong cigar was borne to our nostrils qzmSEPqzm. 
 then the footsteps continued backwards and forwards  backwards and forwards  within a few yards of us qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally  there was a creak from a chair  and the footsteps ceased qzmSEPqzm. 
 then a key clicked in a lock and i heard the rustle of papers qzmSEPqzm. 
  so far i had not dared to look out  but now i gently parted the division of the curtains in front of me and peeped through qzmSEPqzm. 
 from the pressure of holmess shoulder against mine i knew that he was sharing my observations qzmSEPqzm. 
 right in front of us  and almost within our reach  was the broad  rounded back of milverton qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident that we had entirely miscalculated his movements  that he had never been to his bedroom  but that he had been sitting up in some smoking or billiard room in the farther wing of the house  the windows of which we had not seen qzmSEPqzm. 
 his broad  grizzled head  with its shining patch of baldness  was in the immediate foreground of our vision qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was leaning far back in the red leather chair  his legs outstretched  a long black cigar projecting at an angle from his mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 he wore a semimilitary smoking jacket  claretcoloured  with a black velvet collar qzmSEPqzm. 
 in his hand he held a long legal document  which he was reading in an indolent fashion  blowing rings of tobacco smoke from his lips as he did so qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no promise of a speedy departure in his composed bearing and his comfortable attitude qzmSEPqzm. 
  i felt holmess hand steal into mine and give me a reassuring shake  as if to say that the situation was within his powers and that he was easy in his mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was not sure whether he had seen what was only too obvious from my position  that the door of the safe was imperfectly closed  and that milverton might at any moment observe it qzmSEPqzm. 
 in my own mind i had determined that if i were sure  from the rigidity of his gaze  that it had caught his eye  i would at once spring out  throw my greatcoat over his head  pinion him  and leave the rest to holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 but milverton never looked up qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was languidly interested by the papers in his hand  and page after page was turned as he followed the argument of the lawyer qzmSEPqzm. 
 at least  i thought  when he has finished the document and the cigar he will go to his room  but before he had reached the end of either there came a remarkable development which turned our thoughts into quite another channel qzmSEPqzm. 
  several times i had observed that milverton looked at his watch  and once he had risen and sat down again  with a gesture of impatience qzmSEPqzm. 
 the idea  however  that he might have an appointment at so strange an hour never occurred to me until a faint sound reached my ears from the veranda outside qzmSEPqzm. 
 milverton dropped his papers and sat rigid in his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
 the sound was repeated  and then there came a gentle tap at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 milverton rose and opened it qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said he  curtly  you are nearly half an hour late qzmSEPqzm. 
  so this was the explanation of the unlocked door and of the nocturnal vigil of milverton qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was the gentle rustle of a womans dress qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had closed the slit between the curtains as milvertons face had turned in our direction  but now i ventured very carefully to open it once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had resumed his seat  the cigar still projecting at an insolent angle from the corner of his mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 in front of him  in the full glare of the electric light  there stood a tall  slim  dark woman  a veil over her face  a mantle drawn round her chin qzmSEPqzm. 
 her breath came quick and fast  and every inch of the lithe figure was quivering with strong emotion qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said milverton  youve made me lose a good nights rest  my dear qzmSEPqzm. 
 i hope youll prove worth it qzmSEPqzm. 
 you couldnt come any other timeeh  the woman shook her head qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  if you couldnt you couldnt qzmSEPqzm. 
 if the countess is a hard mistress you have your chance to get level with her now qzmSEPqzm. 
 bless the girl  what are you shivering about thats right pull yourself together now  let us get down to business qzmSEPqzm. 
 he took a note from the drawer of his desk qzmSEPqzm. 
 you say that you have five letters which compromise the countess dalbert qzmSEPqzm. 
 you want to sell them qzmSEPqzm. 
 i want to buy them qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far so good qzmSEPqzm. 
 it only remains to fix a price qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should want to inspect the letters  of course qzmSEPqzm. 
 if they are really good specimensgreat heavens  is it you  the woman without a word had raised her veil and dropped the mantle from her chin qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a dark  handsome  clearcut face which confronted milverton  a face with a curved nose  strong  dark eyebrows shading hard  glittering eyes  and a straight  thinlipped mouth set in a dangerous smile qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is i  she said  the woman whose life you have ruined qzmSEPqzm. 
  milverton laughed  but fear vibrated in his voice qzmSEPqzm. 
 you were so very obstinate  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 why did you drive me to such extremities i assure you i wouldnt hurt a fly of my own accord  but every man has his business  and what was i to do i put the price well within your means qzmSEPqzm. 
 you would not pay qzmSEPqzm. 
  so you sent the letters to my husband  and hethe noblest gentleman that ever lived  a man whose boots i was never worthy to lacehe broke his gallant heart and died qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember that last night when i came through that door i begged and prayed you for mercy  and you laughed in my face as you are trying to laugh now  only your coward heart cannot keep your lips from twitching yes  you never thought to see me here again  but it was that night which taught me how i could meet you face to face  and alone qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  charles milverton  what have you to say  dont imagine that you can bully me  said he  rising to his feet qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have only to raise my voice  and i could call my servants and have you arrested qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i will make allowance for your natural anger qzmSEPqzm. 
 leave the room at once as you came  and i will say no more qzmSEPqzm. 
  the woman stood with her hand buried in her bosom  and the same deadly smile on her thin lips qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will ruin no more lives as you ruined mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will wring no more hearts as you wrung mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will free the world of a poisonous thing qzmSEPqzm. 
 take that  you hound  and thatand thatand that  she had drawn a little  gleaming revolver  and emptied barrel after barrel into milvertons body  the muzzle within two feet of his shirt front qzmSEPqzm. 
 he shrank away and then fell forward upon the table  coughing furiously and clawing among the papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he staggered to his feet  received another shot  and rolled upon the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 youve done me  he cried  and lay still qzmSEPqzm. 
 the woman looked at him intently and ground her heel into his upturned face qzmSEPqzm. 
 she looked again  but there was no sound or movement qzmSEPqzm. 
 i heard a sharp rustle  the night air blew into the heated room  and the avenger was gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  no interference upon our part could have saved the man from his fate  but as the woman poured bullet after bullet into milvertons shrinking body i was about to spring out  when i felt holmess cold  strong grasp upon my wrist qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understood the whole argument of that firm  restraining gripthat it was no affair of ours  that justice had overtaken a villain  that we had our own duties and our own objects which were not to be lost sight of qzmSEPqzm. 
 but hardly had the woman rushed from the room when holmes  with swift  silent steps  was over at the other door qzmSEPqzm. 
 he turned the key in the lock qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same instant we heard voices in the house and the sound of hurrying feet qzmSEPqzm. 
 the revolver shots had roused the household qzmSEPqzm. 
 with perfect coolness holmes slipped across to the safe  filled his two arms with bundles of letters  and poured them all into the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 again and again he did it  until the safe was empty qzmSEPqzm. 
 someone turned the handle and beat upon the outside of the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes looked swiftly round qzmSEPqzm. 
 the letter which had been the messenger of death for milverton lay  all mottled with his blood  upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes tossed it in among the blazing papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he drew the key from the outer door  passed through after me  and locked it on the outside qzmSEPqzm. 
 this way  watson  said he  we can scale the garden wall in this direction qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could not have believed that an alarm could have spread so swiftly qzmSEPqzm. 
 looking back  the huge house was one blaze of light qzmSEPqzm. 
 the front door was open  and figures were rushing down the drive qzmSEPqzm. 
 the whole garden was alive with people  and one fellow raised a viewhalloa as we emerged from the veranda and followed hard at our heels qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes seemed to know the ground perfectly  and he threaded his way swiftly among a plantation of small trees  i close at his heels  and our foremost pursuer panting behind us qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a sixfoot wall which barred our path  but he sprang to the top and over qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i did the same i felt the hand of the man behind me grab at my ankle  but i kicked myself free and scrambled over a glassstrewn coping qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fell upon my face among some bushes  but holmes had me on my feet in an instant  and together we dashed away across the huge expanse of hampstead heath qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had run two miles  i suppose  before holmes at last halted and listened intently qzmSEPqzm. 
 all was absolute silence behind us qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had shaken off our pursuers and were safe qzmSEPqzm. 
   we had breakfasted and were smoking our morning pipe on the day after the remarkable experience which i have recorded when mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade  of scotland yard  very solemn and impressive  was ushered into our modest sittingroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  good morning  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said he  good morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 may i ask if you are very busy just now  not too busy to listen to you qzmSEPqzm. 
  i thought that  perhaps  if you had nothing particular on hand  you might care to assist us in a most remarkable case which occurred only last night at hampstead qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 what was that  a murdera most dramatic and remarkable murder qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know how keen you are upon these things  and i would take it as a great favour if you would step down to appledore towers and give us the benefit of your advice qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is no ordinary crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have had our eyes upon this mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 milverton for some time  and  between ourselves  he was a bit of a villain qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is known to have held papers which he used for blackmailing purposes qzmSEPqzm. 
 these papers have all been burned by the murderers qzmSEPqzm. 
 no article of value was taken  as it is probable that the criminals were men of good position  whose sole object was to prevent social exposure qzmSEPqzm. 
  criminals said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 plural  yes  there were two of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were  as nearly as possible  captured redhanded qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have their footmarks  we have their description  its ten to one that we trace them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first fellow was a bit too active  but the second was caught by the undergardener and only got away after a struggle qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a middlesized  stronglybuilt mansquare jaw  thick neck  moustache  a mask over his eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats rather vague  said sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  it might be a description of watson  its true  said the inspector  with much amusement qzmSEPqzm. 
 it might be a description of watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i am afraid i cant help you  lestrade  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fact is that i knew this fellow milverton  that i considered him one of the most dangerous men in london  and that i think there are certain crimes which the law cannot touch  and which therefore  to some extent  justify private revenge qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  its no use arguing qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have made up my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 my sympathies are with the criminals rather than with the victim  and i will not handle this case qzmSEPqzm. 
   holmes had not said one word to me about the tragedy which we had witnessed  but i observed all the morning that he was in his most thoughtful mood  and he gave me the impression  from his vacant eyes and his abstracted manner  of a man who is striving to recall something to his memory qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were in the middle of our lunch when he suddenly sprang to his feet qzmSEPqzm. 
 by jove  watson  ive got it he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 take your hat come with me he hurried at his top speed down baker street and along oxford street  until we had almost reached regent circus qzmSEPqzm. 
 here on the left hand there stands a shop window filled with photographs of the celebrities and beauties of the day qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmess eyes fixed themselves upon one of them  and following his gaze i saw the picture of a regal and stately lady in court dress  with a high diamond tiara upon her noble head qzmSEPqzm. 
 i looked at that delicatelycurved nose  at the marked eyebrows  at the straight mouth  and the strong little chin beneath it qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i caught my breath as i read the timehonoured title of the great nobleman and statesman whose wife she had been qzmSEPqzm. 
 my eyes met those of holmes  and he put his finger to his lips as we turned away from the window qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the six napoleons qzmSEPqzm. 
   it was no very unusual thing for mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade  of scotland yard  to look in upon us of an evening  and his visits were welcome to sherlock holmes  for they enabled him to keep in touch with all that was going on at the police headquarters qzmSEPqzm. 
 in return for the news which lestrade would bring  holmes was always ready to listen with attention to the details of any case upon which the detective was engaged  and was able occasionally  without any active interference  to give some hint or suggestion drawn from his own vast knowledge and experience qzmSEPqzm. 
  on this particular evening lestrade had spoken of the weather and the newspapers qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he had fallen silent  puffing thoughtfully at his cigar qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes looked keenly at him qzmSEPqzm. 
  anything remarkable on hand he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  no  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  nothing very particular qzmSEPqzm. 
  then tell me about it qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade laughed qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  there is no use denying that there is something on my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet it is such an absurd business that i hesitated to bother you about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other hand  although it is trivial  it is undoubtedly queer  and i know that you have a taste for all that is out of the common qzmSEPqzm. 
 but in my opinion it comes more in dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watsons line than ours qzmSEPqzm. 
  disease said i qzmSEPqzm. 
  madness  anyhow qzmSEPqzm. 
 and a queer madness too you wouldnt think there was anyone living at this time of day who had such a hatred of napoleon the first that he would break any image of him that he could see qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes sank back in his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats no business of mine  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats what i said qzmSEPqzm. 
 but then  when the man commits burglary in order to break images which are not his own  that brings it away from the doctor and on to the policeman qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes sat up again qzmSEPqzm. 
  burglary this is more interesting qzmSEPqzm. 
 let me hear the details qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade took out his official notebook and refreshed his memory from its pages qzmSEPqzm. 
  the first case reported was four days ago  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was at the shop of morse hudson  who has a place for the sale of pictures and statues in the kennington road qzmSEPqzm. 
 the assistant had left the front shop for an instant when he heard a crash  and hurrying in he found a plaster bust of napoleon  which stood with several other works of art upon the counter  lying shivered into fragments qzmSEPqzm. 
 he rushed out into the road  but  although several passersby declared that they had noticed a man run out of the shop  he could neither see anyone nor could he find any means of identifying the rascal qzmSEPqzm. 
 it seemed to be one of those senseless acts of hooliganism which occur from time to time  and it was reported to the constable on the beat as such qzmSEPqzm. 
 the plaster cast was not worth more than a few shillings  and the whole affair appeared to be too childish for any particular investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
  the second case  however  was more serious and also more singular qzmSEPqzm. 
 it occurred only last night qzmSEPqzm. 
  in kennington road  and within a few hundred yards of morse hudsons shop  there lives a wellknown medical practitioner  named dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicot  who has one of the largest practices upon the south side of the thames qzmSEPqzm. 
 his residence and principal consultingroom is at kennington road  but he has a branch surgery and dispensary at lower brixton road  two miles away qzmSEPqzm. 
 this dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicot is an enthusiastic admirer of napoleon  and his house is full of books  pictures  and relics of the french emperor qzmSEPqzm. 
 some little time ago he purchased from morse hudson two duplicate plaster casts of the famous head of napoleon by the french sculptor  devine qzmSEPqzm. 
 one of these he placed in his hall in the house at kennington road  and the other on the mantelpiece of the surgery at lower brixton qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  when dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicot came down this morning he was astonished to find that his house had been burgled during the night  but that nothing had been taken save the plaster head from the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 it had been carried out and had been dashed savagely against the garden wall  under which its splintered fragments were discovered qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes rubbed his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is certainly very novel  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  i thought it would please you qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i have not got to the end yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicot was due at his surgery at twelve oclock  and you can imagine his amazement when  on arriving there  he found that the window had been opened in the night  and that the broken pieces of his second bust were strewn all over the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 it had been smashed to atoms where it stood qzmSEPqzm. 
 in neither case were there any signs which could give us a clue as to the criminal or lunatic who had done the mischief qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you have got the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
  they are singular  not to say grotesque  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 may i ask whether the two busts smashed in dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicots rooms were the exact duplicates of the one which was destroyed in morse hudsons shop  they were taken from the same mould qzmSEPqzm. 
  such a fact must tell against the theory that the man who breaks them is influenced by any general hatred of napoleon qzmSEPqzm. 
 considering how many hundreds of statues of the great emperor must exist in london  it is too much to suppose such a coincidence as that a promiscuous iconoclast should chance to begin upon three specimens of the same bust qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i thought as you do  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other hand  this morse hudson is the purveyor of busts in that part of london  and these three were the only ones which had been in his shop for years qzmSEPqzm. 
 so  although  as you say  there are many hundreds of statues in london  it is very probable that these three were the only ones in that district qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore  a local fanatic would begin with them qzmSEPqzm. 
 what do you think  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  there are no limits to the possibilities of monomania  i answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is the condition which the modern french psychologists have called the idee fixe  which may be trifling in character  and accompanied by complete sanity in every other way qzmSEPqzm. 
 a man who had read deeply about napoleon  or who had possibly received some hereditary family injury through the great war  might conceivably form such an idee fixe and under its influence be capable of any fantastic outrage qzmSEPqzm. 
  that wont do  my dear watson  said holmes  shaking his head  for no amount of idee fixe would enable your interesting monomaniac to find out where these busts were situated qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  how do you explain it  i dont attempt to do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would only observe that there is a certain method in the gentlemans eccentric proceedings qzmSEPqzm. 
 for example  in dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicots hall  where a sound might arouse the family  the bust was taken outside before being broken  whereas in the surgery  where there was less danger of an alarm  it was smashed where it stood qzmSEPqzm. 
 the affair seems absurdly trifling  and yet i dare call nothing trivial when i reflect that some of my most classic cases have had the least promising commencement qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will remember  watson  how the dreadful business of the abernetty family was first brought to my notice by the depth which the parsley had sunk into the butter upon a hot day qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cant afford  therefore  to smile at your three broken busts  lestrade  and i shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me hear of any fresh developments of so singular a chain of events qzmSEPqzm. 
   the development for which my friend had asked came in a quicker and an infinitely more tragic form than he could have imagined qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was still dressing in my bedroom next morning when there was a tap at the door and holmes entered  a telegram in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 he read it aloud  come instantly   qzmNUMqzm   pitt street  kensington qzmSEPqzm. 
lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  what is it  then i asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  dont knowmay be anything qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i suspect it is the sequel of the story of the statues qzmSEPqzm. 
 in that case our friend  the imagebreaker  has begun operations in another quarter of london qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres coffee on the table  watson  and i have a cab at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  in half an hour we had reached pitt street  a quiet little backwater just beside one of the briskest currents of london life qzmSEPqzm. 
 no qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  was one of a row  all flatchested  respectable  and most unromantic dwellings qzmSEPqzm. 
 as we drove up we found the railings in front of the house lined by a curious crowd qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes whistled qzmSEPqzm. 
  by george its attempted murder at the least qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing less will hold the london messageboy qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres a deed of violence indicated in that fellows round shoulders and outstretched neck qzmSEPqzm. 
 whats this  watson the top steps swilled down and the other ones dry qzmSEPqzm. 
 footsteps enough  anyhow well  well  theres lestrade at the front window  and we shall soon know all about it qzmSEPqzm. 
  the official received us with a very grave face and showed us into a sittingroom  where an exceedingly unkempt and agitated elderly man  clad in a flannel dressinggown  was pacing up and down qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was introduced to us as the owner of the housemr qzmSEPqzm. 
 horace harker  of the central press syndicate qzmSEPqzm. 
  its the napoleon bust business again  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 you seemed interested last night  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  so i thought perhaps you would be glad to be present now that the affair has taken a very much graver turn qzmSEPqzm. 
  what has it turned to  then  to murder qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 harker  will you tell these gentlemen exactly what has occurred  the man in the dressinggown turned upon us with a most melancholy face qzmSEPqzm. 
  its an extraordinary thing  said he  that all my life i have been collecting other peoples news  and now that a real piece of news has come my own way i am so confused and bothered that i cant put two words together qzmSEPqzm. 
 if i had come in here as a journalist i should have interviewed myself and had two columns in every evening paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 as it is i am giving away valuable copy by telling my story over and over to a string of different people  and i can make no use of it myself qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  ive heard your name  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  and if youll only explain this queer business i shall be paid for my trouble in telling you the story qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes sat down and listened qzmSEPqzm. 
  it all seems to centre round that bust of napoleon which i bought for this very room about four months ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 i picked it up cheap from harding brothers  two doors from the high street station qzmSEPqzm. 
 a great deal of my journalistic work is done at night  and i often write until the early morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 so it was today qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was sitting in my den  which is at the back of the top of the house  about three oclock  when i was convinced that i heard some sounds downstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 i listened  but they were not repeated  and i concluded that they came from outside qzmSEPqzm. 
 then suddenly  about five minutes later  there came a most horrible yellthe most dreadful sound  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that ever i heard qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will ring in my ears as long as i live qzmSEPqzm. 
 i sat frozen with horror for a minute or two qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i seized the poker and went downstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i entered this room i found the window wide open  and i at once observed that the bust was gone from the mantelpiece qzmSEPqzm. 
 why any burglar should take such a thing passes my understanding  for it was only a plaster cast and of no real value whatever qzmSEPqzm. 
  you can see for yourself that anyone going out through that open window could reach the front doorstep by taking a long stride qzmSEPqzm. 
 this was clearly what the burglar had done  so i went round and opened the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 stepping out into the dark i nearly fell over a dead man who was lying there qzmSEPqzm. 
 i ran back for a light  and there was the poor fellow  a great gash in his throat and the whole place swimming in blood qzmSEPqzm. 
 he lay on his back  his knees drawn up  and his mouth horribly open qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall see him in my dreams qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had just time to blow on my policewhistle  and then i must have fainted  for i knew nothing more until i found the policeman standing over me in the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  who was the murdered man asked holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  theres nothing to show who he was  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 you shall see the body at the mortuary  but we have made nothing of it up to now qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a tall man  sunburned  very powerful  not more than thirty qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is poorly dressed  and yet does not appear to be a labourer qzmSEPqzm. 
 a hornhandled clasp knife was lying in a pool of blood beside him qzmSEPqzm. 
 whether it was the weapon which did the deed  or whether it belonged to the dead man  i do not know qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no name on his clothing  and nothing in his pockets save an apple  some string  a shilling map of london  and a photograph qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was evidently taken by a snapshot from a small camera qzmSEPqzm. 
 it represented an alert  sharpfeatured simian man with thick eyebrows  and a very peculiar projection of the lower part of the face like the muzzle of a baboon qzmSEPqzm. 
  and what became of the bust asked holmes  after a careful study of this picture qzmSEPqzm. 
  we had news of it just before you came qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has been found in the front garden of an empty house in campden house road qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was broken into fragments qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am going round now to see it qzmSEPqzm. 
 will you come  certainly qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must just take one look round qzmSEPqzm. 
 he examined the carpet and the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fellow had either very long legs or was a most active man  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 with an area beneath  it was no mean feat to reach that windowledge and open that window qzmSEPqzm. 
 getting back was comparatively simple qzmSEPqzm. 
 are you coming with us to see the remains of your bust  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 harker  the disconsolate journalist had seated himself at a writingtable qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must try and make something of it  said he  though i have no doubt that the first editions of the evening papers are out already with full details qzmSEPqzm. 
 its like my luck you remember when the stand fell at doncaster well  i was the only journalist in the stand  and my journal the only one that had no account of it  for i was too shaken to write it qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now ill be too late with a murder done on my own doorstep qzmSEPqzm. 
  as we left the room we heard his pen travelling shrilly over the foolscap qzmSEPqzm. 
  the spot where the fragments of the bust had been found was only a few hundred yards away qzmSEPqzm. 
 for the first time our eyes rested upon this presentment of the great emperor  which seemed to raise such frantic and destructive hatred in the mind of the unknown qzmSEPqzm. 
 it lay scattered in splintered shards upon the grass qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes picked up several of them and examined them carefully qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was convinced from his intent face and his purposeful manner that at last he was upon a clue qzmSEPqzm. 
  well asked lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes shrugged his shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
  we have a long way to go yet  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yetand yetwell  we have some suggestive facts to act upon qzmSEPqzm. 
 the possession of this trifling bust was worth more in the eyes of this strange criminal than a human life qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is one point qzmSEPqzm. 
 then there is the singular fact that he did not break it in the house  or immediately outside the house  if to break it was his sole object qzmSEPqzm. 
  he was rattled and bustled by meeting this other fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 he hardly knew what he was doing qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  thats likely enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i wish to call your attention very particularly to the position of this house in the garden of which the bust was destroyed qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade looked about him qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was an empty house  and so he knew that he would not be disturbed in the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  but there is another empty house farther up the street which he must have passed before he came to this one qzmSEPqzm. 
 why did he not break it there  since it is evident that every yard that he carried it increased the risk of someone meeting him  i give it up  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes pointed to the street lamp above our heads qzmSEPqzm. 
  he could see what he was doing here and he could not there qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was his reason qzmSEPqzm. 
  by jove thats true  said the detective qzmSEPqzm. 
 now that i come to think of it  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicots bust was broken not far from his red lamp qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  what are we to do with that fact  to remember itto docket it qzmSEPqzm. 
 we may come on something later which will bear upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what steps do you propose to take now  lestrade  the most practical way of getting at it  in my opinion  is to identify the dead man qzmSEPqzm. 
 there should be no difficulty about that qzmSEPqzm. 
 when we have found who he is and who his associates are  we should have a good start in learning what he was doing in pitt street last night  and who it was who met him and killed him on the doorstep of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 horace harker qzmSEPqzm. 
 dont you think so  no doubt  and yet it is not quite the way in which i should approach the case qzmSEPqzm. 
  what would you do  then  oh  you must not let me influence you in any way i suggest that you go on your line and i on mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 we can compare notes afterwards  and each will supplement the other qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good  said lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  if you are going back to pitt street you might see mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 horace harker qzmSEPqzm. 
 tell him from me that i have quite made up my mind  and that it is certain that a dangerous homicidal lunatic with napoleonic delusions was in his house last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will be useful for his article qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade stared qzmSEPqzm. 
  you dont seriously believe that  holmes smiled qzmSEPqzm. 
  dont i well  perhaps i dont qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i am sure that it will interest mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 horace harker and the subscribers of the central press syndicate qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  watson  i think that we shall find that we have a long and rather complex days work before us qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should be glad  lestrade  if you could make it convenient to meet us at baker street at six oclock this evening qzmSEPqzm. 
 until then i should like to keep this photograph found in the dead mans pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is possible that i may have to ask your company and assistance upon a small expedition which will have be undertaken tonight  if my chain of reasoning should prove to be correct qzmSEPqzm. 
 until then  goodbye and good luck  sherlock holmes and i walked together to the high street  where he stopped at the shop of harding brothers  whence the bust had been purchased qzmSEPqzm. 
 a young assistant informed us that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 harding would be absent until after noon  and that he was himself a newcomer who could give us no information qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmess face showed his disappointment and annoyance qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  we cant expect to have it all our own way  watson  he said  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must come back in the afternoon if mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 harding will not be here until then qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am  as you have no doubt surmised  endeavouring to trace these busts to their source  in order to find if there is not something peculiar which may account for their remarkable fate qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us make for mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 morse hudson  of the kennington road  and see if he can throw any light upon the problem qzmSEPqzm. 
  a drive of an hour brought us to the picturedealers establishment qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a small  stout man with a red face and a peppery manner qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 on my very counter  sir  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 what we pay rates and taxes for i dont know  when any ruffian can come in and break ones goods qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  sir  it was i who sold dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicot his two statues qzmSEPqzm. 
 disgraceful  sir a nihilist plot  thats what i make it qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one but an anarchist would go about breaking statues qzmSEPqzm. 
 red republicans  thats what i call em qzmSEPqzm. 
 who did i get the statues from i dont see what that has to do with it qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  if you really want to know  i got them from gelder and co qzmSEPqzm. 
  in church street  stepney qzmSEPqzm. 
 they are a wellknown house in the trade  and have been this twenty years qzmSEPqzm. 
 how many had i threetwo and one are threetwo of dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 barnicots and one smashed in broad daylight on my own counter qzmSEPqzm. 
 do i know that photograph no  i dont qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  i do  though qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  its beppo qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a kind of italian piecework man  who made himself useful in the shop qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could carve a bit and gild and frame  and do odd jobs qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fellow left me last week  and ive heard nothing of him since qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i dont know where he came from nor where he went to qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have nothing against him while he was here qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was gone two days before the bust was smashed qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  thats all we could reasonably expect to get from morse hudson   said holmes  as we emerged from the shop qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have this beppo as a common factor  both in kennington and in kensington  so that is worth a tenmile drive qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  watson  let us make for gelder and co qzmSEPqzm. 
  of stepney  the source and origin of busts qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall be surprised if we dont get some help down there qzmSEPqzm. 
  in rapid succession we passed through the fringe of fashionable london  hotel london  theatrical london  literary london  commercial london  and  finally  maritime london  till we came to a riverside city of a hundred thousand souls  where the tenement houses swelter and reek with the outcasts of europe qzmSEPqzm. 
 here  in a broad thoroughfare  once the abode of wealthy city merchants  we found the sculpture works for which we searched qzmSEPqzm. 
 outside was a considerable yard full of monumental masonry qzmSEPqzm. 
 inside was a large room in which fifty workers were carving or moulding qzmSEPqzm. 
 the manager  a big blond german  received us civilly  and gave a clear answer to all holmess questions qzmSEPqzm. 
 a reference to his books showed that hundreds of casts had been taken from a marble copy of devines head of napoleon  but that the three which had been sent to morse hudson a year or so before had been half of a batch of six  the other three being sent to harding brothers  of kensington qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no reason why those six should be different to any of the other casts qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could suggest no possible cause why anyone should wish to destroy themin fact  he laughed at the idea qzmSEPqzm. 
 their wholesale price was six shillings  but the retailer would get twelve or more qzmSEPqzm. 
 the cast was taken in two moulds from each side of the face  and then these two profiles of plaster of paris were joined together to make the complete bust qzmSEPqzm. 
 the work was usually done by italians in the room we were in qzmSEPqzm. 
 when finished the busts were put on a table in the passage to dry  and afterwards stored qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was all he could tell us qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the production of the photograph had a remarkable effect upon the manager qzmSEPqzm. 
 his face flushed with anger  and his brows knotted over his blue teutonic eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah  the rascal he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  indeed  i know him very well qzmSEPqzm. 
 this has always been a respectable establishment  and the only time that we have ever had the police in it was over this very fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was more than a year ago now qzmSEPqzm. 
 he knifed another italian in the street  and then he came to the works with the police on his heels  and he was taken here qzmSEPqzm. 
 beppo was his namehis second name i never knew qzmSEPqzm. 
 serve me right for engaging a man with such a face qzmSEPqzm. 
 but he was a good workman  one of the best qzmSEPqzm. 
  what did he get  the man lived and he got off with a year qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have no doubt he is out now  but he has not dared to show his nose here qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have a cousin of his here  and i dare say he could tell you where he is qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  no  cried holmes  not a word to the cousinnot a word  i beg you qzmSEPqzm. 
 the matter is very important  and the farther i go with it the more important it seems to grow qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you referred in your ledger to the sale of those casts i observed that the date was june  qzmNUMqzm rd of last year qzmSEPqzm. 
 could you give me the date when beppo was arrested  i could tell you roughly by the paylist  the manager answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes   he continued  after some turning over of pages  he was paid last on may  qzmNUMqzm th qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont think that i need intrude upon your time and patience any more qzmSEPqzm. 
 with a last word of caution that he should say nothing as to our researches we turned our faces westward once more qzmSEPqzm. 
  the afternoon was far advanced before we were able to snatch a hasty luncheon at a restaurant qzmSEPqzm. 
 a newsbill at the entrance announced kensington outrage qzmSEPqzm. 
 murder by a madman  and the contents of the paper showed that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 horace harker had got his account into print after all qzmSEPqzm. 
 two columns were occupied with a highly sensational and flowery rendering of the whole incident qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes propped it against the cruetstand and read it while he ate qzmSEPqzm. 
 once or twice he chuckled qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is all right  watson  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 listen to this it is satisfactory to know that there can be no difference of opinion upon this case  since mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrade  one of the most experienced members of the official force  and mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  the wellknown consulting expert  have each come to the conclusion that the grotesque series of incidents  which have ended in so tragic a fashion  arise from lunacy rather than from deliberate crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 no explanation save mental aberration can cover the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 the press  watson  is a most valuable institution if you only know how to use it qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  if you have quite finished  we will hark back to kensington and see what the manager of harding brothers has to say to the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  the founder of that great emporium proved to be a brisk  crisp little person  very dapper and quick  with a clear head and a ready tongue qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  i have already read the account in the evening papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 horace harker is a customer of ours qzmSEPqzm. 
 we supplied him with the bust some months ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 we ordered three busts of that sort from gelder and co qzmSEPqzm. 
  of stepney qzmSEPqzm. 
 they are all sold now qzmSEPqzm. 
 to whom oh  i dare say by consulting our sales book we could very easily tell you qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  we have the entries here qzmSEPqzm. 
 one to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 harker  you see  and one to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 josiah brown  of laburnum lodge  laburnum vale  chiswick  and one to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sandeford  of lower grove road  reading qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i have never seen this face which you show me in the photograph qzmSEPqzm. 
 you would hardly forget it  would you  sir  for ive seldom seen an uglier qzmSEPqzm. 
 have we any italians on the staff yes  sir  we have several among our workpeople and cleaners qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dare say they might get a peep at that sales book if they wanted to qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no particular reason for keeping a watch upon that book qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  its a very strange business  and i hope that youll let me know if anything comes of your inquiries qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes had taken several notes during mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hardings evidence  and i could see that he was thoroughly satisfied by the turn which affairs were taking qzmSEPqzm. 
 he made no remark  however  save that  unless we hurried  we should be late for our appointment with lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 sure enough  when we reached baker street the detective was already there  and we found him pacing up and down in a fever of impatience qzmSEPqzm. 
 his look of importance showed that his days work had not been in vain qzmSEPqzm. 
  well he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
 what luck  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  we have had a very busy day  and not entirely a wasted one  my friend explained qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have seen both the retailers and also the wholesale manufacturers qzmSEPqzm. 
 i can trace each of the busts now from the beginning qzmSEPqzm. 
  the busts cried lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  you have your own methods  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  and it is not for me to say a word against them  but i think i have done a better days work than you qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have identified the dead man qzmSEPqzm. 
  you dont say so  and found a cause for the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
  splendid  we have an inspector who makes a specialty of saffron hill and the italian quarter qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  this dead man had some catholic emblem round his neck  and that  along with his colour  made me think he was from the south qzmSEPqzm. 
 inspector hill knew him the moment he caught sight of him qzmSEPqzm. 
 his name is pietro venucci  from naples  and he is one of the greatest cutthroats in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is connected with the mafia  which  as you know  is a secret political society  enforcing its decrees by murder qzmSEPqzm. 
 now you see how the affair begins to clear up qzmSEPqzm. 
 the other fellow is probably an italian also  and a member of the mafia qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has broken the rules in some fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
 pietro is set upon his track qzmSEPqzm. 
 probably the photograph we found in his pocket is the man himself  so that he may not knife the wrong person qzmSEPqzm. 
 he dogs the fellow  he sees him enter a house  he waits outside for him  and in the scuffle he receives his own deathwound qzmSEPqzm. 
 how is that  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  holmes clapped his hands approvingly qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent  lestrade  excellent he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i didnt quite follow your explanation of the destruction of the busts qzmSEPqzm. 
  the busts you never can get those busts out of your head qzmSEPqzm. 
 after all  that is nothing  petty larceny  six months at the most qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is the murder that we are really investigating  and i tell you that i am gathering all the threads into my hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  and the next stage  is a very simple one qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall go down with hill to the italian quarter  find the man whose photograph we have got  and arrest him on the charge of murder qzmSEPqzm. 
 will you come with us  i think not qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fancy we can attain our end in a simpler way qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cant say for certain  because it all dependswell  it all depends upon a factor which is completely outside our control qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i have great hopesin fact  the betting is exactly two to onethat if you will come with us tonight i shall be able to help you to lay him by the heels qzmSEPqzm. 
  in the italian quarter  no  i fancy chiswick is an address which is more likely to find him qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you will come with me to chiswick tonight  lestrade  ill promise to go to the italian quarter with you tomorrow  and no harm will be done by the delay qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now i think that a few hours sleep would do us all good  for i do not propose to leave before eleven oclock  and it is unlikely that we shall be back before morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 youll dine with us  lestrade  and then you are welcome to the sofa until it is time for us to start qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the meantime  watson  i should be glad if you would ring for an express messenger  for i have a letter to send  and it is important that it should go at once qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes spent the evening in rummaging among the files of the old daily papers with which one of our lumberrooms was packed qzmSEPqzm. 
 when at last he descended it was with triumph in his eyes  but he said nothing to either of us as to the result of his researches qzmSEPqzm. 
 for my own part  i had followed step by step the methods by which he had traced the various windings of this complex case  and  though i could not yet perceive the goal which we would reach  i understood clearly that holmes expected this grotesque criminal to make an attempt upon the two remaining busts  one of which  i remembered  was at chiswick qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt the object of our journey was to catch him in the very act  and i could not but admire the cunning with which my friend had inserted a wrong clue in the evening paper  so as to give the fellow the idea that he could continue his scheme with impunity qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was not surprised when holmes suggested that i should take my revolver with me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had himself picked up the loaded huntingcrop which was his favourite weapon qzmSEPqzm. 
  a fourwheeler was at the door at eleven  and in it we drove to a spot at the other side of hammersmith bridge qzmSEPqzm. 
 here the cabman was directed to wait qzmSEPqzm. 
 a short walk brought us to a secluded road fringed with pleasant houses  each standing in its own grounds qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the light of a street lamp we read laburnum villa upon the gatepost of one of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the occupants had evidently retired to rest  for all was dark save for a fanlight over the hall door  which shed a single blurred circle on to the garden path qzmSEPqzm. 
 the wooden fence which separated the grounds from the road threw a dense black shadow upon the inner side  and here it was that we crouched qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fear that youll have a long wait  holmes whispered qzmSEPqzm. 
 we may thank our stars that it is not raining qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont think we can even venture to smoke to pass the time qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  its a two to one chance that we get something to pay us for our trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
  it proved  however  that our vigil was not to be so long as holmes had led us to fear  and it ended in a very sudden and singular fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
 in an instant  without the least sound to warn us of his coming  the garden gate swung open  and a lithe  dark figure  as swift and active as an ape  rushed up the garden path qzmSEPqzm. 
 we saw it whisk past the light thrown from over the door and disappear against the black shadow of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a long pause  during which we held our breath  and then a very gentle creaking sound came to our ears qzmSEPqzm. 
 the window was being opened qzmSEPqzm. 
 the noise ceased  and again there was a long silence qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fellow was making his way into the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 we saw the sudden flash of a dark lantern inside the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 what he sought was evidently not there  for again we saw the flash through another blind  and then through another qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us get to the open window qzmSEPqzm. 
 we will nab him as he climbs out   lestrade whispered qzmSEPqzm. 
  but before we could move the man had emerged again qzmSEPqzm. 
 as he came out into the glimmering patch of light we saw that he carried something white under his arm qzmSEPqzm. 
 he looked stealthily all round him qzmSEPqzm. 
 the silence of the deserted street reassured him qzmSEPqzm. 
 turning his back upon us he laid down his burden  and the next instant there was the sound of a sharp tap  followed by a clatter and rattle qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man was so intent upon what he was doing that he never heard our steps as we stole across the grass plot qzmSEPqzm. 
 with the bound of a tiger holmes was on his back  and an instant later lestrade and i had him by either wrist and the handcuffs had been fastened qzmSEPqzm. 
 as we turned him over i saw a hideous  sallow face  with writhing  furious features  glaring up at us  and i knew that it was indeed the man of the photograph whom we had secured qzmSEPqzm. 
  but it was not our prisoner to whom holmes was giving his attention qzmSEPqzm. 
 squatted on the doorstep  he was engaged in most carefully examining that which the man had brought from the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a bust of napoleon like the one which we had seen that morning  and it had been broken into similar fragments qzmSEPqzm. 
 carefully holmes held each separate shard to the light  but in no way did it differ from any other shattered piece of plaster qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had just completed his examination when the hall lights flew up  the door opened  and the owner of the house  a jovial  rotund figure in shirt and trousers  presented himself qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 josiah brown  i suppose said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  and you  no doubt  are mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes i had the note which you sent by the express messenger  and i did exactly what you told me qzmSEPqzm. 
 we locked every door on the inside and awaited developments qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  im very glad to see that you have got the rascal qzmSEPqzm. 
 i hope  gentlemen  that you will come in and have some refreshment qzmSEPqzm. 
  however  lestrade was anxious to get his man into safe quarters  so within a few minutes our cab had been summoned and we were all four upon our way to london qzmSEPqzm. 
 not a word would our captive say  but he glared at us from the shadow of his matted hair  and once  when my hand seemed within his reach  he snapped at it like a hungry wolf qzmSEPqzm. 
 we stayed long enough at the policestation to learn that a search of his clothing revealed nothing save a few shillings and a long sheath knife  the handle of which bore copious traces of recent blood qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats all right  said lestrade  as we parted qzmSEPqzm. 
 hill knows all these gentry  and he will give a name to him qzmSEPqzm. 
 youll find that my theory of the mafia will work out all right qzmSEPqzm. 
 but im sure i am exceedingly obliged to you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  for the workmanlike way in which you laid hands upon him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont quite understand it all yet qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fear it is rather too late an hour for explanations  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  there are one or two details which are not finished off  and it is one of those cases which are worth working out to the very end qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you will come round once more to my rooms at six oclock tomorrow i think i shall be able to show you that even now you have not grasped the entire meaning of this business  which presents some features which make it absolutely original in the history of crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 if ever i permit you to chronicle any more of my little problems  watson  i foresee that you will enliven your pages by an account of the singular adventure of the napoleonic busts qzmSEPqzm. 
   when we met again next evening lestrade was furnished with much information concerning our prisoner qzmSEPqzm. 
 his name  it appeared  was beppo  second name unknown qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a wellknown neerdowell among the italian colony qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had once been a skilful sculptor and had earned an honest living  but he had taken to evil courses and had twice already been in gaolonce for a petty theft and once  as we had already heard  for stabbing a fellowcountryman qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could talk english perfectly well qzmSEPqzm. 
 his reasons for destroying the busts were still unknown  and he refused to answer any questions upon the subject  but the police had discovered that these same busts might very well have been made by his own hands  since he was engaged in this class of work at the establishment of gelder and co qzmSEPqzm. 
 to all this information  much of which we already knew  holmes listened with polite attention  but i  who knew him so well  could clearly see that his thoughts were elsewhere  and i detected a mixture of mingled uneasiness and expectation beneath that mask which he was wont to assume qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last he started in his chair and his eyes brightened qzmSEPqzm. 
 there had been a ring at the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
 a minute later we heard steps upon the stairs  and an elderly  redfaced man with grizzled sidewhiskers was ushered in qzmSEPqzm. 
 in his right hand he carried an oldfashioned carpetbag  which he placed upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  is mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes here  my friend bowed and smiled qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sandeford  of reading  i suppose said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  i fear that i am a little late  but the trains were awkward qzmSEPqzm. 
 you wrote to me about a bust that is in my possession qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have your letter here qzmSEPqzm. 
 you said  i desire to possess a copy of devines napoleon  and am prepared to pay you ten pounds for the one which is in your possession qzmSEPqzm. 
 is that right  certainly qzmSEPqzm. 
  i was very much surprised at your letter  for i could not imagine how you knew that i owned such a thing qzmSEPqzm. 
  of course you must have been surprised  but the explanation is very simple qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 harding  of harding brothers  said that they had sold you their last copy  and he gave me your address qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  that was it  was it did he tell you what i paid for it  no  he did not qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i am an honest man  though not a very rich one qzmSEPqzm. 
 i only gave fifteen shillings for the bust  and i think you ought to know that before i take ten pounds from you qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sure the scruple does you honour  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sandeford qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i have named that price  so i intend to stick to it qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  it is very handsome of you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i brought the bust up with me  as you asked me to do qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is he opened his bag  and at last we saw placed upon our table a complete specimen of that bust which we had already seen more than once in fragments qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes took a paper from his pocket and laid a tenpound note upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will kindly sign that paper  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sandeford  in the presence of these witnesses qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is simply to say that you transfer every possible right that you ever had in the bust to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am a methodical man  you see  and you never know what turn events might take afterwards qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sandeford  here is your money  and i wish you a very good evening qzmSEPqzm. 
  when our visitor had disappeared sherlock holmess movements were such as to rivet our attention qzmSEPqzm. 
 he began by taking a clean white cloth from a drawer and laying it over the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he placed his newlyacquired bust in the centre of the cloth qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally  he picked up his huntingcrop and struck napoleon a sharp blow on the top of the head qzmSEPqzm. 
 the figure broke into fragments  and holmes bent eagerly over the shattered remains qzmSEPqzm. 
 next instant  with a loud shout of triumph  he held up one splinter  in which a round  dark object was fixed like a plum in a pudding qzmSEPqzm. 
  gentlemen  he cried  let me introduce you to the famous black pearl of the borgias qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade and i sat silent for a moment  and then  with a spontaneous impulse  we both broke out clapping as at the wellwrought crisis of a play qzmSEPqzm. 
 a flush of colour sprang to holmess pale cheeks  and he bowed to us like the master dramatist who receives the homage of his audience qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was at such moments that for an instant he ceased to be a reasoning machine  and betrayed his human love for admiration and applause qzmSEPqzm. 
 the same singularly proud and reserved nature which turned away with disdain from popular notoriety was capable of being moved to its depths by spontaneous wonder and praise from a friend qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  gentlemen  said he  it is the most famous pearl now existing in the world  and it has been my good fortune  by a connected chain of inductive reasoning  to trace it from the prince of colonnas bedroom at the dacre hotel  where it was lost  to the interior of this  the last of the six busts of napoleon which were manufactured by gelder and co qzmSEPqzm. 
  of stepney qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will remember  lestrade  the sensation caused by the disappearance of this valuable jewel  and the vain efforts of the london police to recover it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was myself consulted upon the case  but i was unable to throw any light upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
 suspicion fell upon the maid of the princess  who was an italian  and it was proved that she had a brother in london  but we failed to trace any connection between them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the maids name was lucretia venucci  and there is no doubt in my mind that this pietro who was murdered two nights ago was the brother qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been looking up the dates in the old files of the paper  and i find that the disappearance of the pearl was exactly two days before the arrest of beppo for some crime of violence  an event which took place in the factory of gelder and co qzmSEPqzm. 
  at the very moment when these busts were being made qzmSEPqzm. 
 now you clearly see the sequence of events  though you see them  of course  in the inverse order to the way in which they presented themselves to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 beppo had the pearl in his possession qzmSEPqzm. 
 he may have stolen it from pietro  he may have been pietros confederate  he may have been the gobetween of pietro and his sister qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is of no consequence to us which is the correct solution qzmSEPqzm. 
  the main fact is that he had the pearl  and at that moment  when it was on his person  he was pursued by the police qzmSEPqzm. 
 he made for the factory in which he worked  and he knew that he had only a few minutes in which to conceal this enormously valuable prize  which would otherwise be found on him when he was searched qzmSEPqzm. 
 six plaster casts of napoleon were drying in the passage qzmSEPqzm. 
 one of them was still soft qzmSEPqzm. 
 in an instant beppo  a skilful workman  made a small hole in the wet plaster  dropped in the pearl  and with a few touches covered over the aperture once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was an admirable hidingplace qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one could possibly find it qzmSEPqzm. 
 but beppo was condemned to a years imprisonment  and in the meanwhile his six busts were scattered over london qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could not tell which contained his treasure qzmSEPqzm. 
 only by breaking them could he see qzmSEPqzm. 
 even shaking would tell him nothing  for as the plaster was wet it was probable that the pearl would adhere to itas  in fact  it has done qzmSEPqzm. 
 beppo did not despair  and he conducted his search with considerable ingenuity and perseverance qzmSEPqzm. 
 through a cousin who works with gelder he found out the retail firms who had bought the busts qzmSEPqzm. 
 he managed to find employment with morse hudson  and in that way tracked down three of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the pearl was not there qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  with the help of some italian employee  he succeeded in finding out where the other three busts had gone qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first was at harkers qzmSEPqzm. 
 there he was dogged by his confederate  who held beppo responsible for the loss of the pearl  and he stabbed him in the scuffle which followed qzmSEPqzm. 
  if he was his confederate why should he carry his photograph i asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  as a means of tracing him if he wished to inquire about him from any third person qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was the obvious reason qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  after the murder i calculated that beppo would probably hurry rather than delay his movements qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would fear that the police would read his secret  and so he hastened on before they should get ahead of him qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  i could not say that he had not found the pearl in harkers bust qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had not even concluded for certain that it was the pearl  but it was evident to me that he was looking for something  since he carried the bust past the other houses in order to break it in the garden which had a lamp overlooking it qzmSEPqzm. 
 since harkers bust was one in three the chances were exactly as i told you  two to one against the pearl being inside it qzmSEPqzm. 
 there remained two busts  and it was obvious that he would go for the london one first qzmSEPqzm. 
 i warned the inmates of the house  so as to avoid a second tragedy  and we went down with the happiest results qzmSEPqzm. 
 by that time  of course  i knew for certain that it was the borgia pearl that we were after qzmSEPqzm. 
 the name of the murdered man linked the one event with the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 there only remained a single bustthe reading oneand the pearl must be there qzmSEPqzm. 
 i bought it in your presence from the ownerand there it lies qzmSEPqzm. 
  we sat in silence for a moment qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said lestrade  ive seen you handle a good many cases  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  but i dont know that i ever knew a more workmanlike one than that qzmSEPqzm. 
 were not jealous of you at scotland yard qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  sir  we are very proud of you  and if you come down tomorrow theres not a man  from the oldest inspector to the youngest constable  who wouldnt be glad to shake you by the hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank you and as he turned away it seemed to me that he was more nearly moved by the softer human emotions than i had ever seen him qzmSEPqzm. 
 a moment later he was the cold and practical thinker once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 put the pearl in the safe  watson  said he  and get out the papers of the conksingleton forgery case qzmSEPqzm. 
 goodbye  lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 if any little problem comes your way i shall be happy  if i can  to give you a hint or two as to its solution qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the three students qzmSEPqzm. 
   it was in the year  qzmNUMqzm  that a combination of events  into which i need not enter  caused mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes and myself to spend some weeks in one of our great university towns  and it was during this time that the small but instructive adventure which i am about to relate befell us qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will be obvious that any details which would help the reader to exactly identify the college or the criminal would be injudicious and offensive qzmSEPqzm. 
 so painful a scandal may well be allowed to die out qzmSEPqzm. 
 with due discretion the incident itself may  however  be described  since it serves to illustrate some of those qualities for which my friend was remarkable qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will endeavour in my statement to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events to any particular place  or give a clue as to the people concerned qzmSEPqzm. 
  we were residing at the time in furnished lodgings close to a library where sherlock holmes was pursuing some laborious researches in early english chartersresearches which led to results so striking that they may be the subject of one of my future narratives qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it was that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilton soames  tutor and lecturer at the college of st qzmSEPqzm. 
 lukes qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames was a tall  spare man  of a nervous and excitable temperament qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had always known him to be restless in his manner  but on this particular occasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it was clear something very unusual had occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
  i trust  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that you can spare me a few hours of your valuable time qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have had a very painful incident at st qzmSEPqzm. 
 lukes  and really  but for the happy chance of your being in the town  i should have been at a loss what to do qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am very busy just now  and i desire no distractions  my friend answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should much prefer that you called in the aid of the police qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  no  my dear sir  such a course is utterly impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 when once the law is evoked it cannot be stayed again  and this is just one of those cases where  for the credit of the college  it is most essential to avoid scandal qzmSEPqzm. 
 your discretion is as well known as your powers  and you are the one man in the world who can help me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i beg you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  to do what you can qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friends temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the congenial surroundings of baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 without his scrapbooks  his chemicals  and his homely untidiness  he was an uncomfortable man qzmSEPqzm. 
 he shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence  while our visitor in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth his story qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must explain to you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that tomorrow is the first day of the examination for the fortescue scholarship qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am one of the examiners qzmSEPqzm. 
 my subject is greek  and the first of the papers consists of a large passage of greek translation which the candidate has not seen qzmSEPqzm. 
 this passage is printed on the examination paper  and it would naturally be an immense advantage if the candidate could prepare it in advance qzmSEPqzm. 
 for this reason great care is taken to keep the paper secret qzmSEPqzm. 
  today about three oclock the proofs of this paper arrived from the printers qzmSEPqzm. 
 the exercise consists of half a chapter of thucydides qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had to read it over carefully  as the text must be absolutely correct qzmSEPqzm. 
 at fourthirty my task was not yet completed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had  however  promised to take tea in a friends rooms  so i left the proof upon my desk qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was absent rather more than an hour qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are aware  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that our college doors are doublea green baize one within and a heavy oak one without qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i approached my outer door i was amazed to see a key in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 for an instant i imagined that i had left my own there  but on feeling in my pocket i found that it was all right qzmSEPqzm. 
 the only duplicate which existed  so far as i knew  was that which belonged to my servant  bannister  a man who has looked after my room for ten years  and whose honesty is absolutely above suspicion qzmSEPqzm. 
 i found that the key was indeed his  that he had entered my room to know if i wanted tea  and that he had very carelessly left the key in the door when he came out qzmSEPqzm. 
 his visit to my room must have been within a very few minutes of my leaving it qzmSEPqzm. 
 his forgetfulness about the key would have mattered little upon any other occasion  but on this one day it has produced the most deplorable consequences qzmSEPqzm. 
  the moment i looked at my table i was aware that someone had rummaged among my papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 the proof was in three long slips qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had left them all together qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  i found that one of them was lying on the floor  one was on the side table near the window  and the third was where i had left it qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes stirred for the first time qzmSEPqzm. 
  the first page on the floor  the second in the window  the third where you left it  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 you amaze me qzmSEPqzm. 
 how could you possibly know that  pray continue your very interesting statement qzmSEPqzm. 
  for an instant i imagined that bannister had taken the unpardonable liberty of examining my papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 he denied it  however  with the utmost earnestness  and i am convinced that he was speaking the truth qzmSEPqzm. 
 the alternative was that someone passing had observed the key in the door  had known that i was out  and had entered to look at the papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 a large sum of money is at stake  for the scholarship is a very valuable one  and an unscrupulous man might very well run a risk in order to gain an advantage over his fellows qzmSEPqzm. 
  bannister was very much upset by the incident qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had nearly fainted when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with qzmSEPqzm. 
 i gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair while i made a most careful examination of the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 i soon saw that the intruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpled papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the table in the window were several shreds from a pencil which had been sharpened qzmSEPqzm. 
 a broken tip of lead was lying there also qzmSEPqzm. 
 evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry  had broken his pencil  and had been compelled to put a fresh point to it qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent said holmes  who was recovering his goodhumour as his attention became more engrossed by the case qzmSEPqzm. 
 fortune has been your friend qzmSEPqzm. 
  this was not all qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have a new writingtable with a fine surface of red leather qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am prepared to swear  and so is bannister  that it was smooth and unstained qzmSEPqzm. 
 now i found a clean cut in it about three inches longnot a mere scratch  but a positive cut qzmSEPqzm. 
 not only this  but on the table i found a small ball of black dough  or clay  with specks of something which looks like sawdust in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am convinced that these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was at my wits ends  when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me that you were in the town  and i came straight round to put the matter into your hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 do help me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes you see my dilemma qzmSEPqzm. 
 either i must find the man or else the examination must be postponed until fresh papers are prepared  and since this cannot be done without explanation there will ensue a hideous scandal  which will throw a cloud not only on the college  but on the university qzmSEPqzm. 
 above all things i desire to settle the matter quietly and discreetly qzmSEPqzm. 
  i shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as i can  said holmes  rising and putting on his overcoat qzmSEPqzm. 
 the case is not entirely devoid of interest qzmSEPqzm. 
 had anyone visited you in your room after the papers came to you  yes  young daulat ras  an indian student who lives on the same stair  came in to ask me some particulars about the examination qzmSEPqzm. 
  for which he was entered  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
  and the papers were on your table  to the best of my belief they were rolled up qzmSEPqzm. 
  but might be recognised as proofs  possibly qzmSEPqzm. 
  no one else in your room  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  did anyone know that these proofs would be there  no one save the printer qzmSEPqzm. 
  did this man bannister know  no  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one knew qzmSEPqzm. 
  where is bannister now  he was very ill  poor fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 i left him collapsed in the chair qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was in such a hurry to come to you qzmSEPqzm. 
  you left your door open  i locked up the papers first qzmSEPqzm. 
  then it amounts to this  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  that unless the indian student recognised the roll as being proofs  the man who tampered with them came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there qzmSEPqzm. 
  so it seems to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes gave an enigmatic smile qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  said he  let us go round qzmSEPqzm. 
 not one of your cases  watsonmental  not physical qzmSEPqzm. 
 all right  come if you want to qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soamesat your disposal   the sittingroom of our client opened by a long  low  latticed window on to the ancient lichentinted court of the old college qzmSEPqzm. 
 a gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the ground floor was the tutors room qzmSEPqzm. 
 above were three students  one on each story qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he approached it  and  standing on tiptoe with his neck craned  he looked into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  he must have entered through the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no opening except the one pane  said our learned guide qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me said holmes  and he smiled in a singular way as he glanced at our companion qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  if there is nothing to be learned here we had best go inside qzmSEPqzm. 
  the lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room qzmSEPqzm. 
 we stood at the entrance while holmes made an examination of the carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am afraid there are no signs here  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 one could hardly hope for any upon so dry a day qzmSEPqzm. 
 your servant seems to have quite recovered qzmSEPqzm. 
 you left him in a chair  you say  which chair  by the window there qzmSEPqzm. 
  i see qzmSEPqzm. 
 near this little table qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can come in now qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have finished with the carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us take the little table first qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  what has happened is very clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man entered and took the papers  sheet by sheet  from the central table qzmSEPqzm. 
 he carried them over to the window table  because from there he could see if you came across the courtyard  and so could effect an escape qzmSEPqzm. 
  as a matter of fact he could not  said soames  for i entered by the side door qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah  thats good well  anyhow  that was in his mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 let me see the three strips qzmSEPqzm. 
 no finger impressionsno well  he carried over this one first and he copied it qzmSEPqzm. 
 how long would it take him to do that  using every possible contraction a quarter of an hour  not less qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he tossed it down and seized the next qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was in the midst of that when your return caused him to make a very hurried retreatvery hurried  since he had not time to replace the papers which would tell you that he had been there qzmSEPqzm. 
 you were not aware of any hurrying feet on the stair as you entered the outer door  no  i cant say i was qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil  and had  as you observe  to sharpen it again qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is of interest  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 the pencil was not an ordinary one qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was above the usual size  with a soft lead  the outer colour was dark blue  the makers name was printed in silver lettering  and the piece remaining is only about an inch and a half long qzmSEPqzm. 
 look for such a pencil  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  and you have got your man qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i add that he possesses a large and very blunt knife  you have an additional aid qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information qzmSEPqzm. 
 i can follow the other points  said he  but really  in this matter of the length  holmes held out a small chip with the letters nn and a space of clear wood after them qzmSEPqzm. 
  you see  no  i fear that even now  watson  i have always done you an injustice qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are others qzmSEPqzm. 
 what could this nn be it is at the end of a word qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are aware that johann faber is the most common makers name qzmSEPqzm. 
 is it not clear that there is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows the johann he held the small table sideways to the electric light qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin some trace of it might come through upon this polished surface qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i see nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont think there is anything more to be learned here qzmSEPqzm. 
 now for the central table qzmSEPqzm. 
 this small pellet is  i presume  the black  doughy mass you spoke of qzmSEPqzm. 
 roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out  i perceive qzmSEPqzm. 
 as you say  there appear to be grains of sawdust in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 dear me  this is very interesting qzmSEPqzm. 
 and the cuta positive tear  i see qzmSEPqzm. 
 it began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames qzmSEPqzm. 
 where does that door lead to  to my bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you been in it since your adventure  no  i came straight away for you qzmSEPqzm. 
  i should like to have a glance round qzmSEPqzm. 
 what a charming  oldfashioned room perhaps you will kindly wait a minute until i have examined the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i see nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 what about this curtain you hang your clothes behind it qzmSEPqzm. 
 if anyone were forced to conceal himself in this room he must do it there  since the bed is too low and the wardrobe too shallow qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one there  i suppose  as holmes drew the curtain i was aware  from some little rigidity and alertness of his attitude  that he was prepared for an emergency qzmSEPqzm. 
 as a matter of fact the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three or four suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes turned away and stooped suddenly to the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
  halloa whats this said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a small pyramid of black  puttylike stuff  exactly like the one upon the table of the study qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes held it out on his open palm in the glare of the electric light qzmSEPqzm. 
  your visitor seems to have left traces in your bedroom as well as in your sittingroom  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames qzmSEPqzm. 
  what could he have wanted there  i think it is clear enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 you came back by an unexpected way  and so he had no warning until you were at the very door qzmSEPqzm. 
 what could he do he caught up everything which would betray him and he rushed into your bedroom to conceal himself qzmSEPqzm. 
  good gracious  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  do you mean to tell me that all the time i was talking to bannister in this room we had the man prisoner if we had only known it  so i read it qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely there is another alternative  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont know whether you observed my bedroom window  latticepaned  lead framework  three separate windows  one swinging on hinge and large enough to admit a man qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 and it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to be partly invisible qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man might have effected his entrance there  left traces as he passed through the bedroom  and  finally  finding the door open have escaped that way qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes shook his head impatiently qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us be practical  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understand you to say that there are three students who use this stair and are in the habit of passing your door  yes  there are qzmSEPqzm. 
  and they are all in for this examination  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you any reason to suspect any one of them more than the others  soames hesitated qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is a very delicate question  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 one hardly likes to throw suspicion where there are no proofs qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us hear the suspicions qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will look after the proofs qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will tell you  then  in a few words the character of the three men who inhabit these rooms qzmSEPqzm. 
 the lower of the three is gilchrist  a fine scholar and athlete  plays in the rugby team and the cricket team for the college  and got his blue for the hurdles and the long jump qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a fine  manly fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 his father was the notorious sir jabez gilchrist  who ruined himself on the turf qzmSEPqzm. 
 my scholar has been left very poor  but he is hardworking and industrious qzmSEPqzm. 
 he will do well qzmSEPqzm. 
  the second floor is inhabited by daulat ras  the indian qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a quiet  inscrutable fellow  as most of those indians are qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is well up in his work  though his greek is his weak subject qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is steady and methodical qzmSEPqzm. 
  the top floor belongs to miles mclaren qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a brilliant fellow when he chooses to workone of the brightest intellects of the university  but he is wayward  dissipated  and unprincipled qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has been idling all this term  and he must look forward with dread to the examination qzmSEPqzm. 
  then it is he whom you suspect  i dare not go so far as that qzmSEPqzm. 
 but of the three he is perhaps the least unlikely qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  let us have a look at your servant  bannister qzmSEPqzm. 
  he was a little  whitefaced  cleanshaven  grizzlyhaired fellow of fifty qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the quiet routine of his life qzmSEPqzm. 
 his plump face was twitching with his nervousness  and his fingers could not keep still qzmSEPqzm. 
  we are investigating this unhappy business  bannister  said his master qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  i understand  said holmes  that you left your key in the door  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the very day when there were these papers inside  it was most unfortunate  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i have occasionally done the same thing at other times qzmSEPqzm. 
  when did you enter the room  it was about halfpast four qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soamess tea time qzmSEPqzm. 
  how long did you stay  when i saw that he was absent i withdrew at once qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you look at these papers on the table  no  sir  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  how came you to leave the key in the door  i had the teatray in my hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thought i would come back for the key qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i forgot qzmSEPqzm. 
  has the outer door a spring lock  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  then it was open all the time  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  anyone in the room could get out  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  when mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames returned and called for you  you were very much disturbed  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 such a thing has never happened during the many years that i have been here qzmSEPqzm. 
 i nearly fainted  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  so i understand qzmSEPqzm. 
 where were you when you began to feel bad  where was i  sir why  here  near the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is singular  because you sat down in that chair over yonder near the corner qzmSEPqzm. 
 why did you pass these other chairs  i dont know  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 it didnt matter to me where i sat qzmSEPqzm. 
  i really dont think he knew much about it  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was looking very badquite ghastly qzmSEPqzm. 
  you stayed here when your master left  only for a minute or so qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i locked the door and went to my room qzmSEPqzm. 
  whom do you suspect  oh  i would not venture to say  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont believe there is any gentleman in this university who is capable of profiting by such an action qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  sir  ill not believe it qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you  that will do  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 oh  one more word qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend that anything is amiss  no  sir  not a word qzmSEPqzm. 
  you havent seen any of them  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  we will take a walk in the quadrangle  if you please qzmSEPqzm. 
  three yellow squares of light shone above us in the gathering gloom qzmSEPqzm. 
  your three birds are all in their nests  said holmes  looking up qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa whats that one of them seems restless enough qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was the indian  whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon his blind qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was pacing swiftly up and down his room qzmSEPqzm. 
  i should like to have a peep at each of them  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 is it possible  no difficulty in the world  soames answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 this set of rooms is quite the oldest in the college  and it is not unusual for visitors to go over them qzmSEPqzm. 
 come along  and i will personally conduct you qzmSEPqzm. 
  no names  please said holmes  as we knocked at gilchrists door qzmSEPqzm. 
 a tall  flaxenhaired  slim young fellow opened it  and made us welcome when he understood our errand qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were some really curious pieces of mediaeval domestic architecture within qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was so charmed with one of them that he insisted on drawing it on his notebook  broke his pencil  had to borrow one from our host  and finally borrowed a knife to sharpen his own qzmSEPqzm. 
 the same curious accident happened to him in the rooms of the indiana silent  little  hooknosed fellow  who eyed us askance and was obviously glad when holmess architectural studies had come to an end qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not see that in either case holmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching qzmSEPqzm. 
 only at the third did our visit prove abortive qzmSEPqzm. 
 the outer door would not open to our knock  and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad language came from behind it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont care who you are qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can go to blazes roared the angry voice qzmSEPqzm. 
 tomorrows the exam  and i wont be drawn by anyone qzmSEPqzm. 
  a rude fellow  said our guide  flushing with anger as we withdrew down the stair qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  he did not realize that it was i who was knocking  but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous  and  indeed  under the circumstances rather suspicious qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmess response was a curious one qzmSEPqzm. 
  can you tell me his exact height he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  really  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i cannot undertake to say qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is taller than the indian  not so tall as gilchrist qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose five foot six would be about it qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is very important  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  i wish you goodnight qzmSEPqzm. 
  our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay qzmSEPqzm. 
 good gracious  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you are surely not going to leave me in this abrupt fashion you dont seem to realize the position qzmSEPqzm. 
 tomorrow is the examination qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must take some definite action tonight qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cannot allow the examination to be held if one of the papers has been tampered with qzmSEPqzm. 
 the situation must be faced qzmSEPqzm. 
  you must leave it as it is qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall drop round early tomorrow morning and chat the matter over qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is possible that i may be in a position then to indicate some course of action qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile you change nothingnothing at all qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  you can be perfectly easy in your mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 we shall certainly find some way out of your difficulties qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will take the black clay with me  also the pencil cuttings qzmSEPqzm. 
 goodbye qzmSEPqzm. 
  when we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle we again looked up at the windows qzmSEPqzm. 
 the indian still paced his room qzmSEPqzm. 
 the others were invisible qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  watson  what do you think of it holmes asked  as we came out into the main street qzmSEPqzm. 
 quite a little parlour gamesort of threecard trick  is it not there are your three men qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must be one of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 you take your choice qzmSEPqzm. 
 which is yours  the foulmouthed fellow at the top qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is the one with the worst record qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet that indian was a sly fellow also qzmSEPqzm. 
 why should he be pacing his room all the time  there is nothing in that qzmSEPqzm. 
 many men do it when they are trying to learn anything by heart qzmSEPqzm. 
  he looked at us in a queer way qzmSEPqzm. 
  so would you if a flock of strangers came in on you when you were preparing for an examination next day  and every moment was of value qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i see nothing in that qzmSEPqzm. 
 pencils  too  and knivesall was satisfactory qzmSEPqzm. 
 but that fellow does puzzle me qzmSEPqzm. 
  who  why  bannister  the servant qzmSEPqzm. 
 whats his game in the matter  he impressed me as being a perfectly honest man qzmSEPqzm. 
  so he did me qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats the puzzling part qzmSEPqzm. 
 why should a perfectly honest manwell  well  heres a large stationers qzmSEPqzm. 
 we shall begin our researches here qzmSEPqzm. 
  there were only four stationers of any consequence in the town  and at each holmes produced his pencil chips and bid high for a duplicate qzmSEPqzm. 
 all were agreed that one could be ordered  but that it was not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock qzmSEPqzm. 
 my friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure  but shrugged his shoulders in halfhumorous resignation qzmSEPqzm. 
  no good  my dear watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 this  the best and only final clue  has run to nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 but  indeed  i have little doubt that we can build up a sufficient case without it qzmSEPqzm. 
 by jove my dear fellow  it is nearly nine  and the landlady babbled of green peas at seventhirty qzmSEPqzm. 
 what with your eternal tobacco  watson  and your irregularity at meals  i expect that you will get notice to quit and that i shall share your downfallnot  however  before we have solved the problem of the nervous tutor  the careless servant  and the three enterprising students qzmSEPqzm. 
   holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day  though he sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner qzmSEPqzm. 
 at eight in the morning he came into my room just as i finished my toilet qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  watson  said he  it is time we went down to st qzmSEPqzm. 
 lukes qzmSEPqzm. 
 can you do without breakfast  certainly qzmSEPqzm. 
  soames will be in a dreadful fidget until we are able to tell him something positive qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you anything positive to tell him  i think so qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have formed a conclusion  yes  my dear watson  i have solved the mystery qzmSEPqzm. 
  but what fresh evidence could you have got  aha it is not for nothing that i have turned myself out of bed at the untimely hour of six qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have put in two hours hard work and covered at least five miles  with something to show for it qzmSEPqzm. 
 look at that  he held out his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the palm were three little pyramids of black  doughy clay qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  holmes  you had only two yesterday  and one more this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a fair argument that wherever no qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  came from is also the source of nos qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  and  qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 eh  watson well  come along and put friend soames out of his pain qzmSEPqzm. 
   the unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitation when we found him in his chambers qzmSEPqzm. 
 in a few hours the examination would commence  and he was still in the dilemma between making the facts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuable scholarship qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could hardly stand still  so great was his mental agitation  and he ran towards holmes with two eager hands outstretched qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank heaven that you have come i feared that you had given it up in despair qzmSEPqzm. 
 what am i to do shall the examination proceed  yes  let it proceed by all means qzmSEPqzm. 
  but this rascal  he shall not compete qzmSEPqzm. 
  you know him  i think so qzmSEPqzm. 
 if this matter is not to become public we must give ourselves certain powers  and resolve ourselves into a small private courtmartial qzmSEPqzm. 
 you there  if you please  soames watson  you here ill take the armchair in the middle qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think that we are now sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast qzmSEPqzm. 
 kindly ring the bell  bannister entered  and shrunk back in evident surprise and fear at our judicial appearance qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will kindly close the door  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  bannister  will you please tell us the truth about yesterdays incident  the man turned white to the roots of his hair qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have told you everything  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  nothing to add  nothing at all  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  then  i must make some suggestions to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you sat down on that chair yesterday  did you do so in order to conceal some object which would have shown who had been in the room  bannisters face was ghastly qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  sir  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is only a suggestion  said holmes  suavely qzmSEPqzm. 
 i frankly admit that i am unable to prove it qzmSEPqzm. 
 but it seems probable enough  since the moment that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soamess back was turned you released the man who was hiding in that bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  bannister licked his dry lips qzmSEPqzm. 
  there was no man  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah  thats a pity  bannister qzmSEPqzm. 
 up to now you may have spoken the truth  but now i know that you have lied qzmSEPqzm. 
  the mans face set in sullen defiance qzmSEPqzm. 
  there was no man  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  come  bannister  no  sir  there was no one qzmSEPqzm. 
  in that case you can give us no further information qzmSEPqzm. 
 would you please remain in the room stand over there near the bedroom door qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  soames  i am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go up to the room of young gilchrist  and to ask him to step down into yours qzmSEPqzm. 
  an instant later the tutor returned  bringing with him the student qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a fine figure of a man  tall  lithe  and agile  with a springy step and a pleasant  open face qzmSEPqzm. 
 his troubled blue eyes glanced at each of us  and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay upon bannister in the farther corner qzmSEPqzm. 
  just close the door  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 gilchrist  we are all quite alone here  and no one need ever know one word of what passes between us qzmSEPqzm. 
 we can be perfectly frank with each other qzmSEPqzm. 
 we want to know  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 gilchrist  how you  an honourable man  ever came to commit such an action as that of yesterday  the unfortunate young man staggered back and cast a look full of horror and reproach at bannister qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  no  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 gilchrist  sir  i never said a wordnever one word cried the servant qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  but you have now  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  sir  you must see that after bannisters words your position is hopeless  and that your only chance lies in a frank confession qzmSEPqzm. 
  for a moment gilchrist  with upraised hand  tried to control his writhing features qzmSEPqzm. 
 the next he had thrown himself on his knees beside the table and  burying his face in his hands  he had burst into a storm of passionate sobbing qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  come  said holmes  kindly  it is human to err  and at least no one can accuse you of being a callous criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps it would be easier for you if i were to tell mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames what occurred  and you can check me where i am wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 shall i do so well  well  dont trouble to answer qzmSEPqzm. 
 listen  and see that i do you no injustice qzmSEPqzm. 
  from the moment  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  that you said to me that no one  not even bannister  could have told that the papers were in your room  the case began to take a definite shape in my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 the printer one could  of course  dismiss qzmSEPqzm. 
 he could examine the papers in his own office qzmSEPqzm. 
 the indian i also thought nothing of qzmSEPqzm. 
 if the proofs were in a roll he could not possibly know what they were qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the other hand  it seemed an unthinkable coincidence that a man should dare to enter the room  and that by chance on that very day the papers were on the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dismissed that qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man who entered knew that the papers were there qzmSEPqzm. 
 how did he know  when i approached your room i examined the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 you amused me by supposing that i was contemplating the possibility of someone having in broad daylight  under the eyes of all these opposite rooms  forced himself through it qzmSEPqzm. 
 such an idea was absurd qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was measuring how tall a man would need to be in order to see as he passed what papers were on the central table qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am six feet high  and i could do it with an effort qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one less than that would have a chance qzmSEPqzm. 
 already you see i had reason to think that if one of your three students was a man of unusual height he was the most worth watching of the three qzmSEPqzm. 
  i entered and i took you into my confidence as to the suggestions of the side table qzmSEPqzm. 
 of the centre table i could make nothing  until in your description of gilchrist you mentioned that he was a longdistance jumper qzmSEPqzm. 
 then the whole thing came to me in an instant  and i only needed certain corroborative proofs  which i speedily obtained qzmSEPqzm. 
  what happened was this qzmSEPqzm. 
 this young fellow had employed his afternoon at the athletic grounds  where he had been practising the jump qzmSEPqzm. 
 he returned carrying his jumping shoes  which are provided  as you are aware  with several sharp spikes qzmSEPqzm. 
 as he passed your window he saw  by means of his great height  these proofs upon your table  and conjectured what they were qzmSEPqzm. 
 no harm would have been done had it not been that as he passed your door he perceived the key which had been left by the carelessness of your servant qzmSEPqzm. 
 a sudden impulse came over him to enter and see if they were indeed the proofs qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was not a dangerous exploit  for he could always pretend that he had simply looked in to ask a question qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  when he saw that they were indeed the proofs  it was then that he yielded to temptation qzmSEPqzm. 
 he put his shoes on the table qzmSEPqzm. 
 what was it you put on that chair near the window  gloves  said the young man qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes looked triumphantly at bannister qzmSEPqzm. 
 he put his gloves on the chair  and he took the proofs  sheet by sheet  to copy them qzmSEPqzm. 
 he thought the tutor must return by the main gate  and that he would see him qzmSEPqzm. 
 as we know  he came back by the side gate qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly he heard him at the very door qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no possible escape qzmSEPqzm. 
 he forgot his gloves  but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 you observe that the scratch on that table is slight at one side  but deepens in the direction of the bedroom door qzmSEPqzm. 
 that in itself is enough to show us that the shoe had been drawn in that direction and that the culprit had taken refuge there qzmSEPqzm. 
 the earth round the spike had been left on the table  and a second sample was loosened and fell in the bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 i may add that i walked out to the athletic grounds this morning  saw that tenacious black clay is used in the jumpingpit  and carried away a specimen of it  together with some of the fine tan or sawdust which is strewn over it to prevent the athlete from slipping qzmSEPqzm. 
 have i told the truth  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 gilchrist  the student had drawn himself erect qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  it is true  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  good heavens  have you nothing to add cried soames qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  i have  but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has bewildered me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have a letter here  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames  which i wrote to you early this morning in the middle of a restless night qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was before i knew that my sin had found me out qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will see that i have said  i have determined not to go in for the examination qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been offered a commission in the rhodesian police  and i am going out to south africa at once qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by your unfair advantage  said soames qzmSEPqzm. 
 but why did you change your purpose  gilchrist pointed to bannister qzmSEPqzm. 
  there is the man who set me in the right path  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  come now  bannister  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will be clear to you from what i have said that only you could have let this young man out  since you were left in the room  and must have locked the door when you went out qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to his escaping by that window  it was incredible qzmSEPqzm. 
 can you not clear up the last point in this mystery  and tell us the reasons for your action  it was simple enough  sir  if you only had known  but with all your cleverness it was impossible that you could know qzmSEPqzm. 
 time was  sir  when i was butler to old sir jabez gilchrist  this young gentlemans father qzmSEPqzm. 
 when he was ruined i came to the college as servant  but i never forgot my old employer because he was down in the world qzmSEPqzm. 
 i watched his son all i could for the sake of the old days qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  sir  when i came into this room yesterday when the alarm was given  the very first thing i saw was mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 gilchrists tan gloves alying in that chair qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew those gloves well  and i understood their message qzmSEPqzm. 
 if mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames saw them the game was up qzmSEPqzm. 
 i flopped down into that chair  and nothing would budge me until mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 soames he went for you qzmSEPqzm. 
 then out came my poor young master  whom i had dandled on my knee  and confessed it all to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 wasnt it natural  sir  that i should save him  and wasnt it natural also that i should try to speak to him as his dead father would have done  and make him understand that he could not profit by such a deed could you blame me  sir  no  indeed  said holmes  heartily  springing to his feet qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  soames  i think we have cleared your little problem up  and our breakfast awaits us at home qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  watson as to you  sir  i trust that a bright future awaits you in rhodesia qzmSEPqzm. 
 for once you have fallen low qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us see in the future how high you can rise qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the golden pincenez qzmSEPqzm. 
   when i look at the three massive manuscript volumes which contain our work for the year  qzmNUMqzm  i confess that it is very difficult for me  out of such a wealth of material  to select the cases which are most interesting in themselves and at the same time most conducive to a display of those peculiar powers for which my friend was famous qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i turn over the pages i see my notes upon the repulsive story of the red leech and the terrible death of crosby the banker qzmSEPqzm. 
 here also i find an account of the addleton tragedy and the singular contents of the ancient british barrow qzmSEPqzm. 
 the famous smithmortimer succession case comes also within this period  and so does the tracking and arrest of huret  the boulevard assassinan exploit which won for holmes an autograph letter of thanks from the french president and the order of the legion of honour qzmSEPqzm. 
 each of these would furnish a narrative  but on the whole i am of opinion that none of them unite so many singular points of interest as the episode of yoxley old place  which includes not only the lamentable death of young willoughby smith  but also those subsequent developments which threw so curious a light upon the causes of the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a wild  tempestuous night towards the close of november qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes and i sat together in silence all the evening  he engaged with a powerful lens deciphering the remains of the original inscription upon a palimpsest  i deep in a recent treatise upon surgery qzmSEPqzm. 
 outside the wind howled down baker street  while the rain beat fiercely against the windows qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was strange there in the very depths of the town  with ten miles of mans handiwork on every side of us  to feel the iron grip of nature  and to be conscious that to the huge elemental forces all london was no more than the molehills that dot the fields qzmSEPqzm. 
 i walked to the window and looked out on the deserted street qzmSEPqzm. 
 the occasional lamps gleamed on the expanse of muddy road and shining pavement qzmSEPqzm. 
 a single cab was splashing its way from the oxford street end qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  watson  its as well we have not to turn out tonight  said holmes  laying aside his lens and rolling up the palimpsest qzmSEPqzm. 
 ive done enough for one sitting qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is trying work for the eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far as i can make out it is nothing more exciting than an abbeys accounts dating from the second half of the fifteenth century qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa halloa halloa whats this  amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of a horses hoofs and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against the kerb qzmSEPqzm. 
 the cab which i had seen had pulled up at our door qzmSEPqzm. 
  what can he want i ejaculated  as a man stepped out of it qzmSEPqzm. 
  want he wants us qzmSEPqzm. 
 and we  my poor watson  want overcoats and cravats and goloshes  and every aid that man ever invented to fight the weather qzmSEPqzm. 
 wait a bit  though theres the cab off again theres hope yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 hed have kept it if he had wanted us to come qzmSEPqzm. 
 run down  my dear fellow  and open the door  for all virtuous folk have been long in bed qzmSEPqzm. 
  when the light of the hall lamp fell upon our midnight visitor i had no difficulty in recognising him qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was young stanley hopkins  a promising detective  in whose career holmes had several times shown a very practical interest qzmSEPqzm. 
  is he in he asked  eagerly qzmSEPqzm. 
  come up  my dear sir  said holmess voice from above qzmSEPqzm. 
 i hope you have no designs upon us on such a night as this qzmSEPqzm. 
   the detective mounted the stairs  and our lamp gleamed upon his shining waterproof qzmSEPqzm. 
 i helped him out of it while holmes knocked a blaze out of the logs in the grate qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  my dear hopkins  draw up and warm your toes  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 heres a cigar  and the doctor has a prescription containing hot water and a lemon which is good medicine on a night like this qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must be something important which has brought you out in such a gale qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is indeed  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 ive had a bustling afternoon  i promise you qzmSEPqzm. 
 did you see anything of the yoxley case in the latest editions  ive seen nothing later than the fifteenth century today qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  it was only a paragraph  and all wrong at that  so you have not missed anything qzmSEPqzm. 
 i havent let the grass grow under my feet qzmSEPqzm. 
 its down in kent  seven miles from chatham and three from the railway line qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was wired for at threefifteen  reached yoxley old place at five  conducted my investigation  was back at charing cross by the last train  and straight to you by cab qzmSEPqzm. 
  which means  i suppose  that you are not quite clear about your case  it means that i can make neither head nor tail of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far as i can see it is just as tangled a business as ever i handled  and yet at first it seemed so simple that one couldnt go wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres no motive  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats what bothers mei cant put my hand on a motive qzmSEPqzm. 
 heres a man deadtheres no denying thatbut  so far as i can see  no reason on earth why anyone should wish him harm qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us hear about it  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  ive got my facts pretty clear  said stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 all i want now is to know what they all mean qzmSEPqzm. 
 the story  so far as i can make it out  is like this qzmSEPqzm. 
 some years ago this country house  yoxley old place  was taken by an elderly man  who gave the name of professor coram qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was an invalid  keeping his bed half the time  and the other half hobbling round the house with a stick or being pushed about the grounds by the gardener in a bathchair qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was well liked by the few neighbours who called upon him  and he has the reputation down there of being a very learned man qzmSEPqzm. 
 his household used to consist of an elderly housekeeper  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 marker  and of a maid  susan tarlton qzmSEPqzm. 
 these have both been with him since his arrival  and they seem to be women of excellent character qzmSEPqzm. 
 the professor is writing a learned book  and he found it necessary about a year ago to engage a secretary qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first two that he tried were not successes  but the third  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 willoughby smith  a very young man straight from the university  seems to have been just what his employer wanted qzmSEPqzm. 
 his work consisted in writing all the morning to the professors dictation  and he usually spent the evening in hunting up references and passages which bore upon the next days work qzmSEPqzm. 
 this willoughby smith has nothing against him either as a boy at uppingham or as a young man at cambridge qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have seen his testimonials  and from the first he was a decent  quiet  hardworking fellow  with no weak spot in him at all qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet this is the lad who has met his death this morning in the professors study under circumstances which can point only to murder qzmSEPqzm. 
  the wind howled and screamed at the windows qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes and i drew closer to the fire while the young inspector slowly and point by point developed his singular narrative qzmSEPqzm. 
  if you were to search all england  said he  i dont suppose you could find a household more selfcontained or free from outside influences qzmSEPqzm. 
 whole weeks would pass and not one of them go past the garden gate qzmSEPqzm. 
 the professor was buried in his work and existed for nothing else qzmSEPqzm. 
 young smith knew nobody in the neighbourhood  and lived very much as his employer did qzmSEPqzm. 
 the two women had nothing to take them from the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 mortimer the gardener  who wheels the bathchair  is an army pensioneran old crimean man of excellent character qzmSEPqzm. 
 he does not live in the house  but in a threeroomed cottage at the other end of the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 those are the only people that you would find within the grounds of yoxley old place qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time  the gate of the garden is a hundred yards from the main london to chatham road qzmSEPqzm. 
 it opens with a latch  and there is nothing to prevent anyone from walking in qzmSEPqzm. 
  now i will give you the evidence of susan tarlton  who is the only person who can say anything positive about the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was in the forenoon  between eleven and twelve qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was engaged at the moment in hanging some curtains in the upstairs front bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 professor coram was still in bed  for when the weather is bad he seldom rises before midday qzmSEPqzm. 
 the housekeeper was busied with some work in the back of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 willoughby smith had been in his bedroom  which he uses as a sittingroom  but the maid heard him at that moment pass along the passage and descend to the study immediately below her qzmSEPqzm. 
 she did not see him  but she says that she could not be mistaken in his quick  firm tread qzmSEPqzm. 
 she did not hear the study door close  but a minute or so later there was a dreadful cry in the room below qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a wild  hoarse scream  so strange and unnatural that it might have come either from a man or a woman qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same instant there was a heavy thud  which shook the old house  and then all was silence qzmSEPqzm. 
 the maid stood petrified for a moment  and then  recovering her courage  she ran downstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 the study door was shut  and she opened it qzmSEPqzm. 
 inside young mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 willoughby smith was stretched upon the floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 at first she could see no injury  but as she tried to raise him she saw that blood was pouring from the underside of his neck qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was pierced by a very small but very deep wound  which had divided the carotid artery qzmSEPqzm. 
 the instrument with which the injury had been inflicted lay upon the carpet beside him qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was one of those small sealingwax knives to be found on oldfashioned writingtables  with an ivory handle and a stiff blade qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was part of the fittings of the professors own desk qzmSEPqzm. 
  at first the maid thought that young smith was already dead  but on pouring some water from the carafe over his forehead he opened his eyes for an instant qzmSEPqzm. 
 the professor  he murmuredit was she qzmSEPqzm. 
 the maid is prepared to swear that those were the exact words qzmSEPqzm. 
 he tried desperately to say something else  and he held his right hand up in the air qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he fell back dead qzmSEPqzm. 
  in the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the scene  but she was just too late to catch the young mans dying words qzmSEPqzm. 
 leaving susan with the body  she hurried to the professors room qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was sitting up in bed horribly agitated  for he had heard enough to convince him that something terrible had occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
 mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 marker is prepared to swear that the professor was still in his nightclothes  and  indeed  it was impossible for him to dress without the help of mortimer  whose orders were to come at twelve oclock qzmSEPqzm. 
 the professor declares that he heard the distant cry  but that he knows nothing more qzmSEPqzm. 
 he can give no explanation of the young mans last words  the professorit was she  but imagines that they were the outcome of delirium qzmSEPqzm. 
 he believes that willoughby smith had not an enemy in the world  and can give no reason for the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 his first action was to send mortimer the gardener for the local police qzmSEPqzm. 
 a little later the chief constable sent for me qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing was moved before i got there  and strict orders were given that no one should walk upon the paths leading to the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a splendid chance of putting your theories into practice  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was really nothing wanting qzmSEPqzm. 
  except mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  said my companion  with a somewhat bitter smile qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  let us hear about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what sort of job did you make of it  i must ask you first  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  to glance at this rough plan  which will give you a general idea of the position of the professors study and the various points of the case qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will help you in following my investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
  he unfolded the rough chart  which i here reproduce  and he laid it across holmess knee qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rose  and  standing behind holmes  i studied it over his shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  graphic  it is very rough  of course  and it only deals with the points which seem to me to be essential qzmSEPqzm. 
 all the rest you will see later for yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  first of all  presuming that the assassin entered the house  how did he or she come in undoubtedly by the garden path and the back door  from which there is direct access to the study qzmSEPqzm. 
 any other way would have been exceedingly complicated qzmSEPqzm. 
 the escape must have also been made along that line  for of the two other exits from the room one was blocked by susan as she ran downstairs and the other leads straight to the professors bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 i therefore directed my attention at once to the garden path  which was saturated with recent rain and would certainly show any footmarks qzmSEPqzm. 
  my examination showed me that i was dealing with a cautious and expert criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 no footmarks were to be found on the path qzmSEPqzm. 
 there could be no question  however  that someone had passed along the grass border which lines the path  and that he had done so in order to avoid leaving a track qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not find anything in the nature of a distinct impression  but the grass was trodden down and someone had undoubtedly passed qzmSEPqzm. 
 it could only have been the murderer  since neither the gardener nor anyone else had been there that morning and the rain had only begun during the night qzmSEPqzm. 
  one moment  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 where does this path lead to  to the road qzmSEPqzm. 
  how long is it  a hundred yards or so qzmSEPqzm. 
  at the point where the path passes through the gate you could surely pick up the tracks  unfortunately  the path was tiled at that point qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  on the road itself  no  it was all trodden into mire qzmSEPqzm. 
  tuttut well  then  these tracks upon the grass  were they coming or going  it was impossible to say qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was never any outline qzmSEPqzm. 
  a large foot or a small  you could not distinguish qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes gave an ejaculation of impatience qzmSEPqzm. 
  it has been pouring rain and blowing a hurricane ever since  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it will be harder to read now than that palimpsest qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  it cant be helped qzmSEPqzm. 
 what did you do  hopkins  after you had made certain that you had made certain of nothing  i think i made certain of a good deal  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew that someone had entered the house cautiously from without qzmSEPqzm. 
 i next examined the corridor qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is lined with cocoanut matting and had taken no impression of any kind qzmSEPqzm. 
 this brought me into the study itself qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a scantilyfurnished room qzmSEPqzm. 
 the main article is a large writingtable with a fixed bureau qzmSEPqzm. 
 this bureau consists of a double column of drawers with a central small cupboard between them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the drawers were open  the cupboard locked qzmSEPqzm. 
 the drawers  it seems  were always open  and nothing of value was kept in them qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were some papers of importance in the cupboard  but there were no signs that this had been tampered with  and the professor assures me that nothing was missing qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is certain that no robbery has been committed qzmSEPqzm. 
  i come now to the body of the young man qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was found near the bureau  and just to the left of it  as marked upon that chart qzmSEPqzm. 
 the stab was on the right side of the neck and from behind forwards  so that it is almost impossible that it could have been selfinflicted qzmSEPqzm. 
  unless he fell upon the knife  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 the idea crossed my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 but we found the knife some feet away from the body  so that seems impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  of course  there are the mans own dying words qzmSEPqzm. 
 and  finally  there was this very important piece of evidence which was found clasped in the dead mans right hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  from his pocket stanley hopkins drew a small paper packet qzmSEPqzm. 
 he unfolded it and disclosed a golden pincenez  with two broken ends of black silk cord dangling from the end of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 willoughby smith had excellent sight  he added qzmSEPqzm. 
 there can be no question that this was snatched from the face or the person of the assassin qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes took the glasses into his hand and examined them with the utmost attention and interest qzmSEPqzm. 
 he held them on his nose  endeavoured to read through them  went to the window and stared up the street with them  looked at them most minutely in the full light of the lamp  and finally  with a chuckle  seated himself at the table and wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper  which he tossed across to stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats the best i can do for you  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may prove to be of some use qzmSEPqzm. 
  the astonished detective read the note aloud qzmSEPqzm. 
 it ran as follows  wanted  a woman of good address  attired like a lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 she has a remarkably thick nose  with eyes which are set close upon either side of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 she has a puckered forehead  a peering expression  and probably rounded shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are indications that she has had recourse to an optician at least twice during the last few months qzmSEPqzm. 
 as her glasses are of remarkable strength and as opticians are not very numerous  there should be no difficulty in tracing her qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes smiled at the astonishment of hopkins  which must have been reflected upon my features qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely my deductions are simplicity itself  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it would be difficult to name any articles which afford a finer field for inference than a pair of glasses  especially so remarkable a pair as these qzmSEPqzm. 
 that they belong to a woman i infer from their delicacy  and also  of course  from the last words of the dying man qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to her being a person of refinement and well dressed  they are  as you perceive  handsomely mounted in solid gold  and it is inconceivable that anyone who wore such glasses could be slatternly in other respects qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will find that the clips are too wide for your nose  showing that the ladys nose was very broad at the base qzmSEPqzm. 
 this sort of nose is usually a short and coarse one  but there are a sufficient number of exceptions to prevent me from being dogmatic or from insisting upon this point in my description qzmSEPqzm. 
 my own face is a narrow one  and yet i find that i cannot get my eyes into the centre  or near the centre  of these glasses qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore the ladys eyes are set very near to the sides of the nose qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will perceive  watson  that the glasses are concave and of unusual strength qzmSEPqzm. 
 a lady whose vision has been so extremely contracted all her life is sure to have the physical characteristics of such vision  which are seen in the forehead  the eyelids  and the shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  i said  i can follow each of your arguments qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess  however  that i am unable to understand how you arrive at the double visit to the optician qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes took the glasses in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will perceive  he said  that the clips are lined with tiny bands of cork to soften the pressure upon the nose qzmSEPqzm. 
 one of these is discoloured and worn to some slight extent  but the other is new qzmSEPqzm. 
 evidently one has fallen off and been replaced qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should judge that the older of them has not been there more than a few months qzmSEPqzm. 
 they exactly correspond  so i gather that the lady went back to the same establishment for the second qzmSEPqzm. 
  by george  its marvellous cried hopkins  in an ecstasy of admiration qzmSEPqzm. 
 to think that i had all that evidence in my hand and never knew it i had intended  however  to go the round of the london opticians qzmSEPqzm. 
  of course you would qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  have you anything more to tell us about the case  nothing  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think that you know as much as i do nowprobably more qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have had inquiries made as to any stranger seen on the country roads or at the railway station qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have heard of none qzmSEPqzm. 
 what beats me is the utter want of all object in the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 not a ghost of a motive can anyone suggest qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah there i am not in a position to help you qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i suppose you want us to come out tomorrow  if it is not asking too much  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres a train from charing cross to chatham at six in the morning  and we should be at yoxley old place between eight and nine qzmSEPqzm. 
  then we shall take it qzmSEPqzm. 
 your case has certainly some features of great interest  and i shall be delighted to look into it qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  its nearly one  and we had best get a few hours sleep qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dare say you can manage all right on the sofa in front of the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill light my spiritlamp and give you a cup of coffee before we start qzmSEPqzm. 
   the gale had blown itself out next day  but it was a bitter morning when we started upon our journey qzmSEPqzm. 
 we saw the cold winter sun rise over the dreary marshes of the thames and the long  sullen reaches of the river  which i shall ever associate with our pursuit of the andaman islander in the earlier days of our career qzmSEPqzm. 
 after a long and weary journey we alighted at a small station some miles from chatham qzmSEPqzm. 
 while a horse was being put into a trap at the local inn we snatched a hurried breakfast  and so we were all ready for business when we at last arrived at yoxley old place qzmSEPqzm. 
 a constable met us at the garden gate qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  wilson  any news  no  sir  nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
  no reports of any stranger seen  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 down at the station they are certain that no stranger either came or went yesterday qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you had inquiries made at inns and lodgings  yes  sir  there is no one that we cannot account for qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  its only a reasonable walk to chatham qzmSEPqzm. 
 anyone might stay there  or take a train without being observed qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is the garden path of which i spoke  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill pledge my word there was no mark on it yesterday qzmSEPqzm. 
  on which side were the marks on the grass  this side  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 this narrow margin of grass between the path and the flowerbed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cant see the traces now  but they were clear to me then qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  yes  someone has passed along  said holmes  stooping over the grass border qzmSEPqzm. 
 our lady must have picked her steps carefully  must she not  since on the one side she would leave a track on the path  and on the other an even clearer one on the soft bed  yes  sir  she must have been a cool hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  i saw an intent look pass over holmess face qzmSEPqzm. 
  you say that she must have come back this way  yes  sir  there is no other qzmSEPqzm. 
  on this strip of grass  certainly  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  hum it was a very remarkable performancevery remarkable qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  i think we have exhausted the path qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us go farther qzmSEPqzm. 
 this garden door is usually kept open  i suppose then this visitor had nothing to do but to walk in qzmSEPqzm. 
 the idea of murder was not in her mind  or she would have provided herself with some sort of weapon  instead of having to pick this knife off the writingtable qzmSEPqzm. 
 she advanced along this corridor  leaving no traces upon the cocoanut matting qzmSEPqzm. 
 then she found herself in this study qzmSEPqzm. 
 how long was she there we have no means of judging qzmSEPqzm. 
  not more than a few minutes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 i forgot to tell you that mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 marker  the housekeeper  had been in there tidying not very long beforeabout a quarter of an hour  she says qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  that gives us a limit qzmSEPqzm. 
 our lady enters this room and what does she do she goes over to the writingtable qzmSEPqzm. 
 what for not for anything in the drawers qzmSEPqzm. 
 if there had been anything worth her taking it would surely have been locked up qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  it was for something in that wooden bureau qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa what is that scratch upon the face of it just hold a match  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 why did you not tell me of this  hopkins  the mark which he was examining began upon the brass work on the righthand side of the keyhole  and extended for about four inches  where it had scratched the varnish from the surface qzmSEPqzm. 
  i noticed it  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 but youll always find scratches round a keyhole qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is recent  quite recent qzmSEPqzm. 
 see how the brass shines where it is cut qzmSEPqzm. 
 an old scratch would be the same colour as the surface qzmSEPqzm. 
 look at it through my lens qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres the varnish  too  like earth on each side of a furrow qzmSEPqzm. 
 is mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 marker there  a sadfaced  elderly woman came into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you dust this bureau yesterday morning  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you notice this scratch  no  sir  i did not qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sure you did not  for a duster would have swept away these shreds of varnish qzmSEPqzm. 
 who has the key of this bureau  the professor keeps it on his watchchain qzmSEPqzm. 
  is it a simple key  no  sir  it is a chubbs key qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good qzmSEPqzm. 
 mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 marker  you can go qzmSEPqzm. 
 now we are making a little progress qzmSEPqzm. 
 our lady enters the room  advances to the bureau  and either opens it or tries to do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 while she is thus engaged young willoughby smith enters the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 in her hurry to withdraw the key she makes this scratch upon the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seizes her  and she  snatching up the nearest object  which happens to be this knife  strikes at him in order to make him let go his hold qzmSEPqzm. 
 the blow is a fatal one qzmSEPqzm. 
 he falls and she escapes  either with or without the object for which she has come qzmSEPqzm. 
 is susan the maid there could anyone have got away through that door after the time that you heard the cry  susan  no sir  it is impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 before i got down the stair id have seen anyone in the passage qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  the door never opened  for i would have heard it qzmSEPqzm. 
  that settles this exit qzmSEPqzm. 
 then no doubt the lady went out the way she came qzmSEPqzm. 
 i understand that this other passage leads only to the professors room qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no exit that way  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  we shall go down it and make the acquaintance of the professor qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa  hopkins this is very important  very important indeed qzmSEPqzm. 
 the professors corridor is also lined with cocoanut matting qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  sir  what of that  dont you see any bearing upon the case well  well  i dont insist upon it qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt i am wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet it seems to me to be suggestive qzmSEPqzm. 
 come with me and introduce me qzmSEPqzm. 
  we passed down the passage  which was of the same length as that which led to the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the end was a short flight of steps ending in a door qzmSEPqzm. 
 our guide knocked  and then ushered us into the professors bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a very large chamber  lined with innumerable volumes  which had overflowed from the shelves and lay in piles in the corners  or were stacked all round at the base of the cases qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bed was in the centre of the room  and in it  propped up with pillows  was the owner of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have seldom seen a more remarkablelooking person qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a gaunt  aquiline face which was turned towards us  with piercing dark eyes  which lurked in deep hollows under overhung and tufted brows qzmSEPqzm. 
 his hair and beard were white  save that the latter was curiously stained with yellow around his mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 a cigarette glowed amid the tangle of white hair  and the air of the room was fetid with stale tobaccosmoke qzmSEPqzm. 
 as he held out his hand to holmes i perceived that it also was stained yellow with nicotine qzmSEPqzm. 
  a smoker  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes said he  speaking wellchosen english with a curious little mincing accent qzmSEPqzm. 
 pray take a cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
 and you  sir i can recommend them  for i have them especially prepared by ionides of alexandria qzmSEPqzm. 
 he sends me a thousand at a time  and i grieve to say that i have to arrange for a fresh supply every fortnight qzmSEPqzm. 
 bad  sir  very bad  but an old man has few pleasures qzmSEPqzm. 
 tobacco and my workthat is all that is left to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes had lit a cigarette  and was shooting little darting glances all over the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  tobacco and my work  but now only tobacco  the old man exclaimed qzmSEPqzm. 
 alas what a fatal interruption who could have foreseen such a terrible catastrophe so estimable a young man i assure you that after a few months training he was an admirable assistant qzmSEPqzm. 
 what do you think of the matter  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i have not yet made up my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
  i shall indeed be indebted to you if you can throw a light where all is so dark to us qzmSEPqzm. 
 to a poor bookworm and invalid like myself such a blow is paralyzing qzmSEPqzm. 
 i seem to have lost the faculty of thought qzmSEPqzm. 
 but you are a man of actionyou are a man of affairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is part of the everyday routine of your life qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can preserve your balance in every emergency qzmSEPqzm. 
 we are fortunate indeed in having you at our side qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes was pacing up and down one side of the room whilst the old professor was talking qzmSEPqzm. 
 i observed that he was smoking with extraordinary rapidity qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident that he shared our hosts liking for the fresh alexandrian cigarettes qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  it is a crushing blow  said the old man qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is my magnum opusthe pile of papers on the side table yonder qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is my analysis of the documents found in the coptic monasteries of syria and egypt  a work which will cut deep at the very foundations of revealed religion qzmSEPqzm. 
 with my enfeebled health i do not know whether i shall ever be able to complete it now that my assistant has been taken from me qzmSEPqzm. 
 dear me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  why  you are even a quicker smoker than i am myself qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes smiled qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am a connoisseur  said he  taking another cigarette from the boxhis fourthand lighting it from the stub of that which he had finished qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will not trouble you with any lengthy crossexamination  professor coram  since i gather that you were in bed at the time of the crime and could know nothing about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would only ask this qzmSEPqzm. 
 what do you imagine that this poor fellow meant by his last words the professorit was she  the professor shook his head qzmSEPqzm. 
  susan is a country girl  said he  and you know the incredible stupidity of that class qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fancy that the poor fellow murmured some incoherent delirious words  and that she twisted them into this meaningless message qzmSEPqzm. 
  i see qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have no explanation yourself of the tragedy  possibly an accident  possiblyi only breathe it among ourselvesa suicide qzmSEPqzm. 
 young men have their hidden troublessome affair of the heart  perhaps  which we have never known qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a more probable supposition than murder qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the eyeglasses  ah i am only a studenta man of dreams qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cannot explain the practical things of life qzmSEPqzm. 
 but still  we are aware  my friend  that lovegages may take strange shapes qzmSEPqzm. 
 by all means take another cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a pleasure to see anyone appreciate them so qzmSEPqzm. 
 a fan  a glove  glasseswho knows what article may be carried as a token or treasured when a man puts an end to his life this gentleman speaks of footsteps in the grass  but  after all  it is easy to be mistaken on such a point qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to the knife  it might well be thrown far from the unfortunate man as he fell qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is possible that i speak as a child  but to me it seems that willoughby smith has met his fate by his own hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes seemed struck by the theory thus put forward  and he continued to walk up and down for some time  lost in thought and consuming cigarette after cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
  tell me  professor coram  he said  at last  what is in that cupboard in the bureau  nothing that would help a thief qzmSEPqzm. 
 family papers  letters from my poor wife  diplomas of universities which have done me honour qzmSEPqzm. 
 here is the key qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can look for yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes picked up the key and looked at it for an instant  then he handed it back qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  i hardly think that it would help me  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should prefer to go quietly down to your garden and turn the whole matter over in my head qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is something to be said for the theory of suicide which you have put forward qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must apologize for having intruded upon you  professor coram  and i promise that we wont disturb you until after lunch qzmSEPqzm. 
 at two oclock we will come again and report to you anything which may have happened in the interval qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes was curiously distrait  and we walked up and down the garden path for some time in silence qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you a clue i asked  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
  it depends upon those cigarettes that i smoked  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is possible that i am utterly mistaken qzmSEPqzm. 
 the cigarettes will show me qzmSEPqzm. 
  my dear holmes  i exclaimed  how on earth  well  well  you may see for yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
 if not  theres no harm done qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  we always have the optician clue to fall back upon  but i take a short cut when i can get it qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah  here is the good mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 marker let us enjoy five minutes of instructive conversation with her qzmSEPqzm. 
  i may have remarked before that holmes had  when he liked  a peculiarly ingratiating way with women  and that he very readily established terms of confidence with them qzmSEPqzm. 
 in half the time which he had named he had captured the housekeepers goodwill  and was chatting with her as if he had known her for years qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  it is as you say  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 he does smoke something terrible qzmSEPqzm. 
 all day and sometimes all night  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 ive seen that room of a morningwell  sir  youd have thought it was a london fog qzmSEPqzm. 
 poor young mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 smith  he was a smoker also  but not as bad as the professor qzmSEPqzm. 
 his healthwell  i dont know that its better nor worse for the smoking qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah said holmes  but it kills the appetite qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i dont know about that  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  i suppose the professor eats hardly anything  well  he is variable qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill say that for him qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill wager he took no breakfast this morning  and wont face his lunch after all the cigarettes i saw him consume qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  youre out there  sir  as it happens  for he ate a remarkable big breakfast this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont know when ive known him make a better one  and hes ordered a good dish of cutlets for his lunch qzmSEPqzm. 
 im surprised myself  for since i came into that room yesterday and saw young mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 smith lying there on the floor i couldnt bear to look at food qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  it takes all sorts to make a world  and the professor hasnt let it take his appetite away qzmSEPqzm. 
  we loitered the morning away in the garden qzmSEPqzm. 
 stanley hopkins had gone down to the village to look into some rumours of a strange woman who had been seen by some children on the chatham road the previous morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to my friend  all his usual energy seemed to have deserted him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had never known him handle a case in such a halfhearted fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
 even the news brought back by hopkins that he had found the children and that they had undoubtedly seen a woman exactly corresponding with holmess description  and wearing either spectacles or eyeglasses  failed to rouse any sign of keen interest qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was more attentive when susan  who waited upon us at lunch  volunteered the information that she believed mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 smith had been out for a walk yesterday morning  and that he had only returned half an hour before the tragedy occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not myself see the bearing of this incident  but i clearly perceived that holmes was weaving it into the general scheme which he had formed in his brain qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly he sprang from his chair and glanced at his watch qzmSEPqzm. 
 two oclock  gentlemen  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must go up and have it out with our friend the professor qzmSEPqzm. 
  the old man had just finished his lunch  and certainly his empty dish bore evidence to the good appetite with which his housekeeper had credited him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was  indeed  a weird figure as he turned his white mane and his glowing eyes towards us qzmSEPqzm. 
 the eternal cigarette smouldered in his mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had been dressed and was seated in an armchair by the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  have you solved this mystery yet he shoved the large tin of cigarettes which stood on a table beside him towards my companion qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes stretched out his hand at the same moment  and between them they tipped the box over the edge qzmSEPqzm. 
 for a minute or two we were all on our knees retrieving stray cigarettes from impossible places qzmSEPqzm. 
 when we rose again i observed that holmess eyes were shining and his cheeks tinged with colour qzmSEPqzm. 
 only at a crisis have i seen those battlesignals flying qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  said he  i have solved it qzmSEPqzm. 
  stanley hopkins and i stared in amazement qzmSEPqzm. 
 something like a sneer quivered over the gaunt features of the old professor qzmSEPqzm. 
  indeed in the garden  no  here qzmSEPqzm. 
  here when  this instant qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are surely joking  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 you compel me to tell you that this is too serious a matter to be treated in such a fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have forged and tested every link of my chain  professor coram  and i am sure that it is sound qzmSEPqzm. 
 what your motives are or what exact part you play in this strange business i am not yet able to say qzmSEPqzm. 
 in a few minutes i shall probably hear it from your own lips qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile i will reconstruct what is past for your benefit  so that you may know the information which i still require qzmSEPqzm. 
  a lady yesterday entered your study qzmSEPqzm. 
 she came with the intention of possessing herself of certain documents which were in your bureau qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had a key of her own qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have had an opportunity of examining yours  and i do not find that slight discolouration which the scratch made upon the varnish would have produced qzmSEPqzm. 
 you were not an accessory  therefore  and she came  so far as i can read the evidence  without your knowledge to rob you qzmSEPqzm. 
  the professor blew a cloud from his lips qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is most interesting and instructive  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 have you no more to add surely  having traced this lady so far  you can also say what has become of her qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will endeavour to do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the first place she was seized by your secretary  and stabbed him in order to escape qzmSEPqzm. 
 this catastrophe i am inclined to regard as an unhappy accident  for i am convinced that the lady had no intention of inflicting so grievous an injury qzmSEPqzm. 
 an assassin does not come unarmed qzmSEPqzm. 
 horrified by what she had done she rushed wildly away from the scene of the tragedy qzmSEPqzm. 
 unfortunately for her she had lost her glasses in the scuffle  and as she was extremely shortsighted she was really helpless without them qzmSEPqzm. 
 she ran down a corridor  which she imagined to be that by which she had comeboth were lined with cocoanut mattingand it was only when it was too late that she understood that she had taken the wrong passage and that her retreat was cut off behind her qzmSEPqzm. 
 what was she to do she could not go back qzmSEPqzm. 
 she could not remain where she was qzmSEPqzm. 
 she must go on qzmSEPqzm. 
 she went on qzmSEPqzm. 
 she mounted a stair  pushed open a door  and found herself in your room qzmSEPqzm. 
  the old man sat with his mouth open staring wildly at holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 amazement and fear were stamped upon his expressive features qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  with an effort  he shrugged his shoulders and burst into insincere laughter qzmSEPqzm. 
  all very fine  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 but there is one little flaw in your splendid theory qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was myself in my room  and i never left it during the day qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am aware of that  professor coram qzmSEPqzm. 
  and you mean to say that i could lie upon that bed and not be aware that a woman had entered my room  i never said so qzmSEPqzm. 
 you were aware of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 you spoke with her qzmSEPqzm. 
 you recognised her qzmSEPqzm. 
 you aided her to escape qzmSEPqzm. 
  again the professor burst into highkeyed laughter qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had risen to his feet and his eyes glowed like embers qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are mad he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are talking insanely qzmSEPqzm. 
 i helped her to escape where is she now  she is there  said holmes  and he pointed to a high bookcase in the corner of the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  i saw the old man throw up his arms  a terrible convulsion passed over his grim face  and he fell back in his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same instant the bookcase at which holmes pointed swung round upon a hinge  and a woman rushed out into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are right she cried  in a strange foreign voice qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are right i am here qzmSEPqzm. 
  she was brown with the dust and draped with the cobwebs which had come from the walls of her hidingplace qzmSEPqzm. 
 her face  too  was streaked with grime  and at the best she could never have been handsome  for she had the exact physical characteristics which holmes had divined  with  in addition  a long and obstinate chin qzmSEPqzm. 
 what with her natural blindness  and what with the change from dark to light  she stood as one dazed  blinking about her to see where and who we were qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet  in spite of all these disadvantages  there was a certain nobility in the womans bearing  a gallantry in the defiant chin and in the upraised head  which compelled something of respect and admiration qzmSEPqzm. 
 stanley hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed her as his prisoner  but she waved him aside gently  and yet with an overmastering dignity which compelled obedience qzmSEPqzm. 
 the old man lay back in his chair  with a twitching face  and stared at her with brooding eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  i am your prisoner  she said qzmSEPqzm. 
 from where i stood i could hear everything  and i know that you have learned the truth qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confess it all qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was i who killed the young man qzmSEPqzm. 
 but you are right  you who say it was an accident qzmSEPqzm. 
 i did not even know that it was a knife which i held in my hand  for in my despair i snatched anything from the table and struck at him to make him let me go qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is the truth that i tell qzmSEPqzm. 
  madam  said holmes  i am sure that it is the truth qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fear that you are far from well qzmSEPqzm. 
  she had turned a dreadful colour  the more ghastly under the dark duststreaks upon her face qzmSEPqzm. 
 she seated herself on the side of the bed  then she resumed qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have only a little time here  she said  but i would have you to know the whole truth qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am this mans wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is not an englishman qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a russian qzmSEPqzm. 
 his name i will not tell qzmSEPqzm. 
  for the first time the old man stirred qzmSEPqzm. 
 god bless you  anna he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 god bless you  she cast a look of the deepest disdain in his direction qzmSEPqzm. 
 why should you cling so hard to that wretched life of yours  sergius said she qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has done harm to many and good to nonenot even to yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  it is not for me to cause the frail thread to be snapped before gods time qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have enough already upon my soul since i crossed the threshold of this cursed house qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i must speak or i shall be too late qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have said  gentlemen  that i am this mans wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was fifty and i a foolish girl of twenty when we married qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was in a city of russia  a universityi will not name the place qzmSEPqzm. 
  god bless you  anna murmured the old man again qzmSEPqzm. 
  we were reformersrevolutionistsnihilists  you understand qzmSEPqzm. 
 he and i and many more qzmSEPqzm. 
 then there came a time of trouble  a police officer was killed  many were arrested  evidence was wanted  and in order to save his own life and to earn a great reward my husband betrayed his own wife and his companions qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  we were all arrested upon his confession qzmSEPqzm. 
 some of us found our way to the gallows and some to siberia qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was among these last  but my term was not for life qzmSEPqzm. 
 my husband came to england with his illgotten gains  and has lived in quiet ever since  knowing well that if the brotherhood knew where he was not a week would pass before justice would be done qzmSEPqzm. 
  the old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself to a cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am in your hands  anna  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 you were always good to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have not yet told you the height of his villainy  said she qzmSEPqzm. 
 among our comrades of the order there was one who was the friend of my heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was noble  unselfish  lovingall that my husband was not qzmSEPqzm. 
 he hated violence qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were all guiltyif that is guiltbut he was not qzmSEPqzm. 
 he wrote for ever dissuading us from such a course qzmSEPqzm. 
 these letters would have saved him qzmSEPqzm. 
 so would my diary  in which from day to day i had entered both my feelings towards him and the view which each of us had taken qzmSEPqzm. 
 my husband found and kept both diary and letters qzmSEPqzm. 
 he hid them  and he tried hard to swear away the young mans life qzmSEPqzm. 
 in this he failed  but alexis was sent a convict to siberia  where now  at this moment  he works in a salt mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 think of that  you villain  you villain  now  now  at this very moment  alexis  a man whose name you are not worthy to speak  works and lives like a slave  and yet i have your life in my hands and i let you go qzmSEPqzm. 
  you were always a noble woman  anna  said the old man  puffing at his cigarette qzmSEPqzm. 
  she had risen  but she fell back again with a little cry of pain qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must finish  she said qzmSEPqzm. 
 when my term was over i set myself to get the diary and letters which  if sent to the russian government  would procure my friends release qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew that my husband had come to england qzmSEPqzm. 
 after months of searching i discovered where he was qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew that he still had the diary  for when i was in siberia i had a letter from him once reproaching me and quoting some passages from its pages qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet i was sure that with his revengeful nature he would never give it to me of his own free will qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must get it for myself qzmSEPqzm. 
 with this object i engaged an agent from a private detective firm  who entered my husbands house as secretaryit was your second secretary  sergius  the one who left you so hurriedly qzmSEPqzm. 
 he found that papers were kept in the cupboard  and he got an impression of the key qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would not go farther qzmSEPqzm. 
 he furnished me with a plan of the house  and he told me that in the forenoon the study was always empty  as the secretary was employed up here qzmSEPqzm. 
 so at last i took my courage in both hands and i came down to get the papers for myself qzmSEPqzm. 
 i succeeded  but at what a cost  i had just taken the papers and was locking the cupboard when the young man seized me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had seen him already that morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had met me in the road and i had asked him to tell me where professor coram lived  not knowing that he was in his employ qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly exactly said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the secretary came back and told his employer of the woman he had met qzmSEPqzm. 
 then in his last breath he tried to send a message that it was shethe she whom he had just discussed with him qzmSEPqzm. 
  you must let me speak  said the woman  in an imperative voice  and her face contracted as if in pain qzmSEPqzm. 
 when he had fallen i rushed from the room  chose the wrong door  and found myself in my husbands room qzmSEPqzm. 
 he spoke of giving me up qzmSEPqzm. 
 i showed him that if he did so his life was in my hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 if he gave me to the law i could give him to the brotherhood qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was not that i wished to live for my own sake  but it was that i desired to accomplish my purpose qzmSEPqzm. 
 he knew that i would do what i saidthat his own fate was involved in mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 for that reason and for no other he shielded me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he thrust me into that dark hidingplace  a relic of old days  known only to himself qzmSEPqzm. 
 he took his meals in his own room  and so was able to give me part of his food qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was agreed that when the police left the house i should slip away by night and come back no more qzmSEPqzm. 
 but in some way you have read our plans qzmSEPqzm. 
 she tore from the bosom of her dress a small packet qzmSEPqzm. 
 these are my last words  said she  here is the packet which will save alexis qzmSEPqzm. 
 i confide it to your honour and to your love of justice qzmSEPqzm. 
 take it you will deliver it at the russian embassy qzmSEPqzm. 
 now i have done my duty  and  stop her cried holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had bounded across the room and had wrenched a small phial from her hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  too late she said  sinking back on the bed qzmSEPqzm. 
 too late i took the poison before i left my hidingplace qzmSEPqzm. 
 my head swims i am going i charge you  sir  to remember the packet qzmSEPqzm. 
   a simple case  and yet in some ways an instructive one  holmes remarked  as we travelled back to town qzmSEPqzm. 
 it hinged from the outset upon the pincenez qzmSEPqzm. 
 but for the fortunate chance of the dying man having seized these i am not sure that we could ever have reached our solution qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was clear to me from the strength of the glasses that the wearer must have been very blind and helpless when deprived of them qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you asked me to believe that she walked along a narrow strip of grass without once making a false step i remarked  as you may remember  that it was a noteworthy performance qzmSEPqzm. 
 in my mind i set it down as an impossible performance  save in the unlikely case that she had a second pair of glasses qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was forced  therefore  to seriously consider the hypothesis that she had remained within the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 on perceiving the similarity of the two corridors it became clear that she might very easily have made such a mistake  and in that case it was evident that she must have entered the professors room qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was keenly on the alert  therefore  for whatever would bear out this supposition  and i examined the room narrowly for anything in the shape of a hidingplace qzmSEPqzm. 
 the carpet seemed continuous and firmly nailed  so i dismissed the idea of a trapdoor qzmSEPqzm. 
 there might well be a recess behind the books qzmSEPqzm. 
 as you are aware  such devices are common in old libraries qzmSEPqzm. 
 i observed that books were piled on the floor at all other points  but that one bookcase was left clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 this  then  might be the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could see no marks to guide me  but the carpet was of a dun colour  which lends itself very well to examination qzmSEPqzm. 
 i therefore smoked a great number of those excellent cigarettes  and i dropped the ash all over the space in front of the suspected bookcase qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a simple trick  but exceedingly effective qzmSEPqzm. 
 i then went downstairs and i ascertained  in your presence  watson  without your perceiving the drift of my remarks  that professor corams consumption of food had increasedas one would expect when he is supplying a second person qzmSEPqzm. 
 we then ascended to the room again  when  by upsetting the cigarettebox  i obtained a very excellent view of the floor  and was able to see quite clearly  from the traces upon the cigarette ash  that the prisoner had  in our absence  come out from her retreat qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  hopkins  here we are at charing cross  and i congratulate you on having brought your case to a successful conclusion qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are going to headquarters  no doubt qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think  watson  you and i will drive together to the russian embassy qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the missing threequarter qzmSEPqzm. 
   we were fairly accustomed to receive weird telegrams at baker street  but i have a particular recollection of one which reached us on a gloomy february morning some seven or eight years ago and gave mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes a puzzled quarter of an hour qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was addressed to him  and ran thus  please await me qzmSEPqzm. 
 terrible misfortune qzmSEPqzm. 
 right wing threequarter missing  indispensable to morrow qzmSEPqzm. 
overton qzmSEPqzm. 
  strand postmark and dispatched tenthirtysix  said holmes  reading it over and over qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 overton was evidently considerably excited when he sent it  and somewhat incoherent in consequence qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  he will be here  i dare say  by the time i have looked through the times  and then we shall know all about it qzmSEPqzm. 
 even the most insignificant problem would be welcome in these stagnant days qzmSEPqzm. 
  things had indeed been very slow with us  and i had learned to dread such periods of inaction  for i knew by experience that my companions brain was so abnormally active that it was dangerous to leave it without material upon which to work qzmSEPqzm. 
 for years i had gradually weaned him from that drug mania which had threatened once to check his remarkable career qzmSEPqzm. 
 now i knew that under ordinary conditions he no longer craved for this artificial stimulus  but i was well aware that the fiend was not dead  but sleeping  and i have known that the sleep was a light one and the waking near when in periods of idleness i have seen the drawn look upon holmess ascetic face  and the brooding of his deepset and inscrutable eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore i blessed this mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 overton  whoever he might be  since he had come with his enigmatic message to break that dangerous calm which brought more peril to my friend than all the storms of his tempestuous life qzmSEPqzm. 
  as we had expected  the telegram was soon followed by its sender  and the card of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 cyril overton  of trinity college  cambridge  announced the arrival of an enormous young man  sixteen stone of solid bone and muscle  who spanned the doorway with his broad shoulders and looked from one of us to the other with a comely face which was haggard with anxiety qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  my companion bowed qzmSEPqzm. 
  ive been down to scotland yard  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw inspector stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 he advised me to come to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 he said the case  so far as he could see  was more in your line than in that of the regular police qzmSEPqzm. 
  pray sit down and tell me what is the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  its awful  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  simply awful i wonder my hair isnt grey qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey stauntonyouve heard of him  of course hes simply the hinge that the whole team turns on qzmSEPqzm. 
 id rather spare two from the pack and have godfrey for my threequarter line qzmSEPqzm. 
 whether its passing  or tackling  or dribbling  theres no one to touch him  and then  hes got the head and can hold us all together qzmSEPqzm. 
 what am i to do thats what i ask you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 theres moorhouse  first reserve  but he is trained as a half  and he always edges right in on to the scrum instead of keeping out on the touchline qzmSEPqzm. 
 hes a fine placekick  its true  but  then  he has no judgment  and he cant sprint for nuts qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  morton or johnson  the oxford fliers  could romp round him qzmSEPqzm. 
 stevenson is fast enough  but he couldnt drop from the twentyfive line  and a threequarter who cant either punt or drop isnt worth a place for pace alone qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  we are done unless you can help me to find godfrey staunton qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend had listened with amused surprise to this long speech  which was poured forth with extraordinary vigour and earnestness  every point being driven home by the slapping of a brawny hand upon the speakers knee qzmSEPqzm. 
 when our visitor was silent holmes stretched out his hand and took down letter s of his commonplace book qzmSEPqzm. 
 for once he dug in vain into that mine of varied information qzmSEPqzm. 
  there is arthur h qzmSEPqzm. 
 staunton  the rising young forger  said he  and there was henry staunton  whom i helped to hang  but godfrey staunton is a new name to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was our visitors turn to look surprised qzmSEPqzm. 
  why  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i thought you knew things  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose  then  if you have never heard of godfrey staunton you dont know cyril overton either  holmes shook his head goodhumouredly qzmSEPqzm. 
  great scot cried the athlete qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  i was first reserve for england against wales  and ive skippered the varsity all this year qzmSEPqzm. 
 but thats nothing i didnt think there was a soul in england who didnt know godfrey staunton  the crack threequarter  cambridge  blackheath  and five internationals qzmSEPqzm. 
 good lord mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  where have you lived  holmes laughed at the young giants naive astonishment qzmSEPqzm. 
  you live in a different world to me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 overton  a sweeter and healthier one qzmSEPqzm. 
 my ramifications stretch out into many sections of society  but never  i am happy to say  into amateur sport  which is the best and soundest thing in england qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  your unexpected visit this morning shows me that even in that world of fresh air and fair play there may be work for me to do  so now  my good sir  i beg you to sit down and to tell me slowly and quietly exactly what it is that has occurred  and how you desire that i should help you qzmSEPqzm. 
  young overtons face assumed the bothered look of the man who is more accustomed to using his muscles than his wits  but by degrees  with many repetitions and obscurities which i may omit from his narrative  he laid his strange story before us qzmSEPqzm. 
   its this way  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i have said  i am the skipper of the rugger team of cambridge varsity  and godfrey staunton is my best man qzmSEPqzm. 
 tomorrow we play oxford qzmSEPqzm. 
 yesterday we all came up and we settled at bentleys private hotel qzmSEPqzm. 
 at ten oclock i went round and saw that all the fellows had gone to roost  for i believe in strict training and plenty of sleep to keep a team fit qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had a word or two with godfrey before he turned in qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seemed to me to be pale and bothered qzmSEPqzm. 
 i asked him what was the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
 he said he was all rightjust a touch of headache qzmSEPqzm. 
 i bade him goodnight and left him qzmSEPqzm. 
 half an hour later the porter tells me that a roughlooking man with a beard called with a note for godfrey qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had not gone to bed and the note was taken to his room qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey read it and fell back in a chair as if he had been poleaxed qzmSEPqzm. 
 the porter was so scared that he was going to fetch me  but godfrey stopped him  had a drink of water  and pulled himself together qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he went downstairs  said a few words to the man who was waiting in the hall  and the two of them went off together qzmSEPqzm. 
 the last that the porter saw of them  they were almost running down the street in the direction of the strand qzmSEPqzm. 
 this morning godfreys room was empty  his bed had never been slept in  and his things were all just as i had seen them the night before qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had gone off at a moments notice with this stranger  and no word has come from him since qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont believe he will ever come back qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a sportsman  was godfrey  down to his marrow  and he wouldnt have stopped his training and let in his skipper if it were not for some cause that was too strong for him qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  i feel as if he were gone for good and we should never see him again qzmSEPqzm. 
   sherlock holmes listened with the deepest attention to this singular narrative qzmSEPqzm. 
  what did you do he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  i wired to cambridge to learn if anything had been heard of him there qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have had an answer qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one has seen him qzmSEPqzm. 
  could he have got back to cambridge  yes  there is a late trainquarterpast eleven qzmSEPqzm. 
  but so far as you can ascertain he did not take it  no  he has not been seen qzmSEPqzm. 
  what did you do next  i wired to lord mountjames qzmSEPqzm. 
  why to lord mountjames  godfrey is an orphan  and lord mountjames is his nearest relativehis uncle  i believe qzmSEPqzm. 
  indeed qzmSEPqzm. 
 this throws new light upon the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
 lord mountjames is one of the richest men in england qzmSEPqzm. 
  so ive heard godfrey say qzmSEPqzm. 
  and your friend was closely related  yes  he was his heir  and the old boy is nearly eightycram full of gout  too qzmSEPqzm. 
 they say he could chalk his billiardcue with his knuckles qzmSEPqzm. 
 he never allowed godfrey a shilling in his life  for he is an absolute miser  but it will all come to him right enough qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you heard from lord mountjames  no qzmSEPqzm. 
  what motive could your friend have in going to lord mountjames  well  something was worrying him the night before  and if it was to do with money it is possible that he would make for his nearest relative who had so much of it  though from all i have heard he would not have much chance of getting it qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey was not fond of the old man qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would not go if he could help it qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  we can soon determine that qzmSEPqzm. 
 if your friend was going to his relative  lord mountjames  you have then to explain the visit of this roughlooking fellow at so late an hour  and the agitation that was caused by his coming qzmSEPqzm. 
  cyril overton pressed his hands to his head qzmSEPqzm. 
 i can make nothing of it   said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  well  i have a clear day  and i shall be happy to look into the matter  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should strongly recommend you to make your preparations for your match without reference to this young gentleman qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must  as you say  have been an overpowering necessity which tore him away in such a fashion  and the same necessity is likely to hold him away qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us step round together to this hotel  and see if the porter can throw any fresh light upon the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes was a pastmaster in the art of putting a humble witness at his ease  and very soon  in the privacy of godfrey stauntons abandoned room  he had extracted all that the porter had to tell qzmSEPqzm. 
 the visitor of the night before was not a gentleman  neither was he a working man qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was simply what the porter described as a mediumlooking chap  a man of fifty  beard grizzled  pale face  quietly dressed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he seemed himself to be agitated qzmSEPqzm. 
 the porter had observed his hand trembling when he had held out the note qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey staunton had crammed the note into his pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 staunton had not shaken hands with the man in the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 they had exchanged a few sentences  of which the porter had only distinguished the one word time qzmSEPqzm. 
 then they had hurried off in the manner described qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was just halfpast ten by the hall clock qzmSEPqzm. 
  let me see  said holmes  seating himself on stauntons bed qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are the day porter  are you not  yes  sir  i go off duty at eleven qzmSEPqzm. 
  the night porter saw nothing  i suppose  no  sir  one theatre party came in late qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one else qzmSEPqzm. 
  were you on duty all day yesterday  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you take any messages to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 staunton  yes  sir  one telegram qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah thats interesting qzmSEPqzm. 
 what oclock was this  about six qzmSEPqzm. 
  where was mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 staunton when he received it  here in his room qzmSEPqzm. 
  were you present when he opened it  yes  sir  i waited to see if there was an answer qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  was there  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 he wrote an answer qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you take it  no  he took it himself qzmSEPqzm. 
  but he wrote it in your presence  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was standing by the door  and he with his back turned at that table qzmSEPqzm. 
 when he had written it he said  all right  porter  i will take this myself qzmSEPqzm. 
  what did he write it with  a pen  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  was the telegraphic form one of these on the table  yes  sir  it was the top one qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes rose qzmSEPqzm. 
 taking the forms he carried them over to the window and carefully examined that which was uppermost qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is a pity he did not write in pencil  said he  throwing them down again with a shrug of disappointment qzmSEPqzm. 
 as you have no doubt frequently observed  watson  the impression usually goes througha fact which has dissolved many a happy marriage qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  i can find no trace here qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rejoice  however  to perceive that he wrote with a broadpointed quill pen  and i can hardly doubt that we will find some impression upon this blottingpad qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah  yes  surely this is the very thing  he tore off a strip of the blottingpaper and turned towards us the following hieroglyphic  graphic  cyril overton was much excited qzmSEPqzm. 
 hold it to the glass he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is unnecessary  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the paper is thin  and the reverse will give the message qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is qzmSEPqzm. 
 he turned it over and we read  graphic  so that is the tail end of the telegram which godfrey staunton dispatched within a few hours of his disappearance qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are at least six words of the message which have escaped us  but what remainsstand by us for gods sakeproves that this young man saw a formidable danger which approached him  and from which someone else could protect him qzmSEPqzm. 
 us  mark you another person was involved qzmSEPqzm. 
 who should it be but the palefaced  bearded man  who seemed himself in so nervous a state what  then  is the connection between godfrey staunton and the bearded man and what is the third source from which each of them sought for help against pressing danger our inquiry has already narrowed down to that qzmSEPqzm. 
  we have only to find to whom that telegram is addressed  i suggested qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly  my dear watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 your reflection  though profound  had already crossed my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i dare say it may have come to your notice that if you walk into a postoffice and demand to see the counterfoil of another mans message there may be some disinclination on the part of the officials to oblige you qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is so much red tape in these matters however  i have no doubt that with a little delicacy and finesse the end may be attained qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  i should like in your presence  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 overton  to go through these papers which have been left upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  there were a number of letters  bills  and notebooks  which holmes turned over and examined with quick  nervous fingers and darting  penetrating eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing here  he said  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  i suppose your friend was a healthy young fellownothing amiss with him  sound as a bell qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you ever known him ill  not a day qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has been laid up with a hack  and once he slipped his kneecap  but that was nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
  perhaps he was not so strong as you suppose qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should think he may have had some secret trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
 with your assent i will put one or two of these papers in my pocket  in case they should bear upon our future inquiry qzmSEPqzm. 
  one moment one moment cried a querulous voice  and we looked up to find a queer little old man  jerking and twitching in the doorway qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was dressed in rusty black  with a very broad brimmed tophat and a loose white necktiethe whole effect being that of a very rustic parson or of an undertakers mute qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet  in spite of his shabby and even absurd appearance  his voice had a sharp crackle  and his manner a quick intensity which commanded attention qzmSEPqzm. 
  who are you  sir  and by what right do you touch this gentlemans papers he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am a private detective  and i am endeavouring to explain his disappearance qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  you are  are you and who instructed you  eh  this gentleman  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 stauntons friend  was referred to me by scotland yard qzmSEPqzm. 
  who are you  sir  i am cyril overton qzmSEPqzm. 
  then it is you who sent me a telegram qzmSEPqzm. 
 my name is lord mountjames qzmSEPqzm. 
 i came round as quickly as the bayswater bus would bring me qzmSEPqzm. 
 so you have instructed a detective  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  and are you prepared to meet the cost  i have no doubt  sir  that my friend godfrey  when we find him  will be prepared to do that qzmSEPqzm. 
  but if he is never found  eh answer me that  in that case no doubt his family  nothing of the sort  sir screamed the little man qzmSEPqzm. 
 dont look to me for a pennynot a penny you understand that  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 detective i am all the family that this young man has got  and i tell you that i am not responsible qzmSEPqzm. 
 if he has any expectations it is due to the fact that i have never wasted money  and i do not propose to begin to do so now qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to those papers with which you are making so free  i may tell you that in case there should be anything of any value among them you will be held strictly to account for what you do with them qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good  sir  said sherlock holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 may i ask in the meanwhile whether you have yourself any theory to account for this young mans disappearance  no  sir  i have not qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is big enough and old enough to look after himself  and if he is so foolish as to lose himself i entirely refuse to accept the responsibility of hunting for him qzmSEPqzm. 
  i quite understand your position  said holmes  with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps you dont quite understand mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey staunton appears to have been a poor man qzmSEPqzm. 
 if he has been kidnapped it could not have been for anything which he himself possesses qzmSEPqzm. 
 the fame of your wealth has gone abroad  lord mountjames  and it is entirely possible that a gang of thieves have secured your nephew in order to gain from him some information as to your house  your habits  and your treasure qzmSEPqzm. 
  the face of our unpleasant little visitor turned as white as his neckcloth qzmSEPqzm. 
  heavens  sir  what an idea i never thought of such villainy what inhuman rogues there are in the world but godfrey is a fine lada staunch lad qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing would induce him to give his old uncle away qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill have the plate moved over to the bank this evening qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the meantime spare no pains  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 detective i beg you to leave no stone unturned to bring him safely back qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to money  well  so far as a fiver  or even a tenner  goes  you can always look to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  even in his chastened frame of mind the noble miser could give us no information which could help us  for he knew little of the private life of his nephew qzmSEPqzm. 
 our only clue lay in the truncated telegram  and with a copy of this in his hand holmes set forth to find a second link for his chain qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had shaken off lord mountjames  and overton had gone to consult with the other members of his team over the misfortune which had befallen them qzmSEPqzm. 
  there was a telegraphoffice at a short distance from the hotel qzmSEPqzm. 
 we halted outside it qzmSEPqzm. 
  its worth trying  watson  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  with a warrant we could demand to see the counterfoils  but we have not reached that stage yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont suppose they remember faces in so busy a place qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us venture it qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sorry to trouble you  said he  in his blandest manner  to the young woman behind the grating  there is some small mistake about a telegram i sent yesterday qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have had no answer  and i very much fear that i must have omitted to put my name at the end qzmSEPqzm. 
 could you tell me if this was so  the young woman turned over a sheaf of counterfoils qzmSEPqzm. 
  what oclock was it she asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  a little after six qzmSEPqzm. 
  whom was it to  holmes put his finger to his lips and glanced at me qzmSEPqzm. 
 the last words in it were for gods sake  he whispered  confidentially  i am very anxious at getting no answer qzmSEPqzm. 
  the young woman separated one of the forms qzmSEPqzm. 
  this is it qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no name  said she  smoothing it out upon the counter qzmSEPqzm. 
  then that  of course  accounts for my getting no answer  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 dear me  how very stupid of me  to be sure good morning  miss  and many thanks for having relieved my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 he chuckled and rubbed his hands when we found ourselves in the street once more qzmSEPqzm. 
  well i asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  we progress  my dear watson  we progress qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had seven different schemes for getting a glimpse of that telegram  but i could hardly hope to succeed the very first time qzmSEPqzm. 
  and what have you gained  a startingpoint for our investigation qzmSEPqzm. 
 he hailed a cab qzmSEPqzm. 
 kings cross station  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  we have a journey  then  yes  i think we must run down to cambridge together qzmSEPqzm. 
 all the indications seem to me to point in that direction qzmSEPqzm. 
  tell me  i asked  as we rattled up grays inn road  have you any suspicion yet as to the cause of the disappearance i dont think that among all our cases i have known one where the motives are more obscure qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely you dont really imagine that he may be kidnapped in order to give information against his wealthy uncle  i confess  my dear watson  that that does not appeal to me as a very probable explanation qzmSEPqzm. 
 it struck me  however  as being the one which was most likely to interest that exceedingly unpleasant old person qzmSEPqzm. 
  it certainly did that qzmSEPqzm. 
 but what are your alternatives  i could mention several qzmSEPqzm. 
 you must admit that it is curious and suggestive that this incident should occur on the eve of this important match  and should involve the only man whose presence seems essential to the success of the side qzmSEPqzm. 
 it may  of course  be coincidence  but it is interesting qzmSEPqzm. 
 amateur sport is free from betting  but a good deal of outside betting goes on among the public  and it is possible that it might be worth someones while to get at a player as the ruffians of the turf get at a racehorse qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is one explanation qzmSEPqzm. 
 a second very obvious one is that this young man really is the heir of a great property  however modest his means may at present be  and it is not impossible that a plot to hold him for ransom might be concocted qzmSEPqzm. 
  these theories take no account of the telegram qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite true  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 the telegram still remains the only solid thing with which we have to deal  and we must not permit our attention to wander away from it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is to gain light upon the purpose of this telegram that we are now upon our way to cambridge qzmSEPqzm. 
 the path of our investigation is at present obscure  but i shall be very much surprised if before evening we have not cleared it up or made a considerable advance along it qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was already dark when we reached the old university city qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes took a cab at the station  and ordered the man to drive to the house of dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 leslie armstrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 a few minutes later we had stopped at a large mansion in the busiest thoroughfare qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were shown in  and after a long wait were at last admitted into the consultingroom  where we found the doctor seated behind his table qzmSEPqzm. 
  it argues the degree in which i had lost touch with my profession that the name of leslie armstrong was unknown to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 now i am aware that he is not only one of the heads of the medical school of the university  but a thinker of european reputation in more than one branch of science qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet even without knowing his brilliant record one could not fail to be impressed by a mere glance at the man  the square  massive face  the brooding eyes under the thatched brows  and the granite moulding of the inflexible jaw qzmSEPqzm. 
 a man of deep character  a man with an alert mind  grim  ascetic  selfcontained  formidableso i read dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 leslie armstrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 he held my friends card in his hand  and he looked up with no very pleased expression upon his dour features qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have heard your name  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  and i am aware of your profession  one of which i by no means approve qzmSEPqzm. 
  in that  doctor  you will find yourself in agreement with every criminal in the country  said my friend  quietly qzmSEPqzm. 
  so far as your efforts are directed towards the suppression of crime  sir  they must have the support of every reasonable member of the community  though i cannot doubt that the official machinery is amply sufficient for the purpose qzmSEPqzm. 
 where your calling is more open to criticism is when you pry into the secrets of private individuals  when you rake up family matters which are better hidden  and when you incidentally waste the time of men who are more busy than yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the present moment  for example  i should be writing a treatise instead of conversing with you qzmSEPqzm. 
  no doubt  doctor  and yet the conversation may prove more important than the treatise qzmSEPqzm. 
 incidentally i may tell you that we are doing the reverse of what you very justly blame  and that we are endeavouring to prevent anything like public exposure of private matters which must necessarily follow when once the case is fairly in the hands of the official police qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may look upon me simply as an irregular pioneer who goes in front of the regular forces of the country qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have come to ask you about mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey staunton qzmSEPqzm. 
  what about him  you know him  do you not  he is an intimate friend of mine qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are aware that he has disappeared  ah  indeed there was no change of expression in the rugged features of the doctor qzmSEPqzm. 
  he left his hotel last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 he has not been heard of qzmSEPqzm. 
  no doubt he will return qzmSEPqzm. 
  tomorrow is the varsity football match qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have no sympathy with these childish games qzmSEPqzm. 
 the young mans fate interests me deeply  since i know him and like him qzmSEPqzm. 
 the football match does not come within my horizon at all qzmSEPqzm. 
  i claim your sympathy  then  in my investigation of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 stauntons fate qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you know where he is  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have not seen him since yesterday  no  i have not qzmSEPqzm. 
  was mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 staunton a healthy man  absolutely qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you ever know him ill  never qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes popped a sheet of paper before the doctors eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 then perhaps you will explain this receipted bill for thirteen guineas  paid by mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey staunton last month to dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 leslie armstrong of cambridge qzmSEPqzm. 
 i picked it out from among the papers upon his desk qzmSEPqzm. 
  the doctor flushed with anger qzmSEPqzm. 
  i do not feel that there is any reason why i should render an explanation to you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes replaced the bill in his notebook qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you prefer a public explanation it must come sooner or later  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have already told you that i can hush up that which others will be bound to publish  and you would really be wiser to take me into your complete confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  i know nothing about it qzmSEPqzm. 
  did you hear from mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 staunton in london  certainly not qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me  dear me  the postoffice again holmes sighed  wearily qzmSEPqzm. 
 a most urgent telegram was dispatched to you from london by godfrey staunton at sixfifteen yesterday eveninga telegram which is undoubtedly associated with his disappearanceand yet you have not had it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is most culpable qzmSEPqzm. 
 i shall certainly go down to the office here and register a complaint qzmSEPqzm. 
  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 leslie armstrong sprang up from behind his desk  and his dark face was crimson with fury qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill trouble you to walk out of my house  sir  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can tell your employer  lord mountjames  that i do not wish to have anything to do either with him or with his agents qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  sir  not another word he rang the bell furiously qzmSEPqzm. 
 john  show these gentlemen out a pompous butler ushered us severely to the door  and we found ourselves in the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes burst out laughing qzmSEPqzm. 
  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 leslie armstrong is certainly a man of energy and character  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have not seen a man who  if he turned his talents that way  was more calculated to fill the gap left by the illustrious moriarty qzmSEPqzm. 
 and now  my poor watson  here we are  stranded and friendless in this inhospitable town  which we cannot leave without abandoning our case qzmSEPqzm. 
 this little inn just opposite armstrongs house is singularly adapted to our needs qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you would engage a front room and purchase the necessaries for the night  i may have time to make a few inquiries qzmSEPqzm. 
  these few inquiries proved  however  to be a more lengthy proceeding than holmes had imagined  for he did not return to the inn until nearly nine oclock qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was pale and dejected  stained with dust  and exhausted with hunger and fatigue qzmSEPqzm. 
 a cold supper was ready upon the table  and when his needs were satisfied and his pipe alight he was ready to take that half comic and wholly philosophic view which was natural to him when his affairs were going awry qzmSEPqzm. 
 the sound of carriage wheels caused him to rise and glance out of the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 a brougham and pair of greys under the glare of a gaslamp stood before the doctors door qzmSEPqzm. 
  its been out three hours  said holmes  started at halfpast six  and here it is back again qzmSEPqzm. 
 that gives a radius of ten or twelve miles  and he does it once  or sometimes twice  a day qzmSEPqzm. 
  no unusual thing for a doctor in practice qzmSEPqzm. 
  but armstrong is not really a doctor in practice qzmSEPqzm. 
 he is a lecturer and a consultant  but he does not care for general practice  which distracts him from his literary work qzmSEPqzm. 
 why  then  does he make these long journeys  which must be exceedingly irksome to him  and who is it that he visits  his coachman  my dear watson  can you doubt that it was to him that i first applied i do not know whether it came from his own innate depravity or from the promptings of his master  but he was rude enough to set a dog at me qzmSEPqzm. 
 neither dog nor man liked the look of my stick  however  and the matter fell through qzmSEPqzm. 
 relations were strained after that  and further inquiries out of the question qzmSEPqzm. 
 all that i have learned i got from a friendly native in the yard of our own inn qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was he who told me of the doctors habits and of his daily journey qzmSEPqzm. 
 at that instant  to give point to his words  the carriage came round to the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  could you not follow it  excellent  watson you are scintillating this evening qzmSEPqzm. 
 the idea did cross my mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is  as you may have observed  a bicycle shop next to our inn qzmSEPqzm. 
 into this i rushed  engaged a bicycle  and was able to get started before the carriage was quite out of sight qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rapidly overtook it  and then  keeping at a discreet distance of a hundred yards or so  i followed its lights until we were clear of the town qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had got well out on the country road when a somewhat mortifying incident occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
 the carriage stopped  the doctor alighted  walked swiftly back to where i had also halted  and told me in an excellent sardonic fashion that he feared the road was narrow  and that he hoped his carriage did not impede the passage of my bicycle qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing could have been more admirable than his way of putting it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i at once rode past the carriage  and  keeping to the main road  i went on for a few miles  and then halted in a convenient place to see if the carriage passed qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no sign of it  however  and so it became evident that it had turned down one of several side roads which i had observed qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rode back  but again saw nothing of the carriage  and now  as you perceive  it has returned after me qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  i had at the outset no particular reason to connect these journeys with the disappearance of godfrey staunton  and was only inclined to investigate them on the general grounds that everything which concerns dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong is at present of interest to us  but  now that i find he keeps so keen a lookout upon anyone who may follow him on these excursions  the affair appears more important  and i shall not be satisfied until i have made the matter clear qzmSEPqzm. 
  we can follow him tomorrow qzmSEPqzm. 
  can we it is not so easy as you seem to think qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are not familiar with cambridgeshire scenery  are you it does not lend itself to concealment qzmSEPqzm. 
 all this country that i passed over tonight is as flat and clean as the palm of your hand  and the man we are following is no fool  as he very clearly showed tonight qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have wired to overton to let us know any fresh london developments at this address  and in the meantime we can only concentrate our attention upon dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong  whose name the obliging young lady at the office allowed me to read upon the counterfoil of stauntons urgent message qzmSEPqzm. 
 he knows where the young man isto that ill swearand if he knows  then it must be our own fault if we cannot manage to know also qzmSEPqzm. 
 at present it must be admitted that the odd trick is in his possession  and  as you are aware  watson  it is not my habit to leave the game in that condition qzmSEPqzm. 
  and yet the next day brought us no nearer to the solution of the mystery qzmSEPqzm. 
 a note was handed in after breakfast  which holmes passed across to me with a smile qzmSEPqzm. 
  sir  it ran  i can assure you that you are wasting your time in dogging my movements qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have  as you discovered last night  a window at the back of my brougham  and if you desire a twentymile ride which will lead you to the spot from which you started  you have only to follow me qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  i can inform you that no spying upon me can in any way help mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey staunton  and i am convinced that the best service you can do to that gentleman is to return at once to london and to report to your employer that you are unable to trace him qzmSEPqzm. 
 your time in cambridge will certainly be wasted qzmSEPqzm. 
  yours faithfully   leslie armstrong qzmSEPqzm. 
   an outspoken  honest antagonist is the doctor  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  he excites my curiosity  and i must really know more before i leave him qzmSEPqzm. 
  his carriage is at his door now  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
 there he is stepping into it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw him glance up at our window as he did so qzmSEPqzm. 
 suppose i try my luck upon the bicycle  no  no  my dear watson with all respect for your natural acumen i do not think that you are quite a match for the worthy doctor qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think that possibly i can attain our end by some independent explorations of my own qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am afraid that i must leave you to your own devices  as the appearance of two inquiring strangers upon a sleepy countryside might excite more gossip than i care for qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt you will find some sights to amuse you in this venerable city  and i hope to bring back a more favourable report to you before evening qzmSEPqzm. 
  once more  however  my friend was destined to be disappointed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he came back at night weary and unsuccessful qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have had a blank day  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 having got the doctors general direction  i spent the day in visiting all the villages upon that side of cambridge  and comparing notes with publicans and other local news agencies qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have covered some ground chesterton  histon  waterbeach  and oakington have each been explored and have each proved disappointing qzmSEPqzm. 
 the daily appearance of a brougham and pair could hardly have been overlooked in such sleepy hollows qzmSEPqzm. 
 the doctor has scored once more qzmSEPqzm. 
 is there a telegram for me  yes  i opened it qzmSEPqzm. 
 here it is ask for pompey from jeremy dixon  trinity college qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont understand it qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  it is clear enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is from our friend overton  and is in answer to a question from me qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill just send round a note to mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jeremy dixon  and then i have no doubt that our luck will turn qzmSEPqzm. 
 by the way  is there any news of the match  yes  the local evening paper has an excellent account in its last edition qzmSEPqzm. 
 oxford won by a goal and two tries qzmSEPqzm. 
 the last sentences of the description say the defeat of the light blues may be entirely attributed to the unfortunate absence of the crack international  godfrey staunton  whose want was felt at every instant of the game qzmSEPqzm. 
 the lack of combination in the threequarter line and their weakness both in attack and defence more than neutralized the efforts of a heavy and hardworking pack qzmSEPqzm. 
  then our friend overtons forebodings have been justified  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 personally i am in agreement with dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong  and football does not come within my horizon qzmSEPqzm. 
 early to bed tonight  watson  for i foresee that tomorrow may be an eventful day qzmSEPqzm. 
   i was horrified by my first glimpse of holmes next morning  for he sat by the fire holding his tiny hypodermic syringe qzmSEPqzm. 
 i associated that instrument with the single weakness of his nature  and i feared the worst when i saw it glittering in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 he laughed at my expression of dismay  and laid it upon the table qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  no  my dear fellow  there is no cause for alarm qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is not upon this occasion the instrument of evil  but it will rather prove to be the key which will unlock our mystery qzmSEPqzm. 
 on this syringe i base all my hopes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have just returned from a small scouting expedition and everything is favourable qzmSEPqzm. 
 eat a good breakfast  watson  for i propose to get upon dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrongs trail today  and once on it i will not stop for rest or food until i run him to his burrow qzmSEPqzm. 
  in that case  said i  we had best carry our breakfast with us  for he is making an early start qzmSEPqzm. 
 his carriage is at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  never mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 let him go qzmSEPqzm. 
 he will be clever if he can drive where i cannot follow him qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you have finished come downstairs with me  and i will introduce you to a detective who is a very eminent specialist in the work that lies before us qzmSEPqzm. 
  when we descended i followed holmes into the stable yard  where he opened the door of a loosebox and led out a squat  lopeared  whiteandtan dog  something between a beagle and a foxhound qzmSEPqzm. 
  let me introduce you to pompey  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 pompey is the pride of the local draghounds  no very great flier  as his build will show  but a staunch hound on a scent qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  pompey  you may not be fast  but i expect you will be too fast for a couple of middleaged london gentlemen  so i will take the liberty of fastening this leather leash to your collar qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  boy  come along  and show what you can do qzmSEPqzm. 
 he led him across to the doctors door qzmSEPqzm. 
 the dog sniffed round for an instant  and then with a shrill whine of excitement started off down the street  tugging at his leash in his efforts to go faster qzmSEPqzm. 
 in half an hour  we were clear of the town and hastening down a country road qzmSEPqzm. 
  what have you done  holmes i asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  a threadbare and venerable device  but useful upon occasion qzmSEPqzm. 
 i walked into the doctors yard this morning and shot my syringe full of aniseed over the hind wheel qzmSEPqzm. 
 a draghound will follow aniseed from here to john o groats  and our friend armstrong would have to drive through the cam before he would shake pompey off his trail qzmSEPqzm. 
 oh  the cunning rascal this is how he gave me the slip the other night qzmSEPqzm. 
  the dog had suddenly turned out of the main road into a grassgrown lane qzmSEPqzm. 
 half a mile farther this opened into another broad road  and the trail turned hard to the right in the direction of the town  which we had just quitted qzmSEPqzm. 
 the road took a sweep to the south of the town and continued in the opposite direction to that in which we started qzmSEPqzm. 
  this detour has been entirely for our benefit  then said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 no wonder that my inquiries among those villages led to nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 the doctor has certainly played the game for all it is worth  and one would like to know the reason for such elaborate deception qzmSEPqzm. 
 this should be the village of trumpington to the right of us qzmSEPqzm. 
 and  by jove here is the brougham coming round the corner qzmSEPqzm. 
 quick  watson  quick  or we are done  he sprang through a gate into a field  dragging the reluctant pompey after him qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had hardly got under the shelter of the hedge when the carriage rattled past qzmSEPqzm. 
 i caught a glimpse of dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong within  his shoulders bowed  his head sunk on his hands  the very image of distress qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could tell by my companions graver face that he also had seen qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fear there is some dark ending to our quest  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 it cannot be long before we know it qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  pompey ah  it is the cottage in the field  there could be no doubt that we had reached the end of our journey qzmSEPqzm. 
 pompey ran about and whined eagerly outside the gate where the marks of the broughams wheels were still to be seen qzmSEPqzm. 
 a footpath led across to the lonely cottage qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes tied the dog to the hedge  and we hastened onwards qzmSEPqzm. 
 my friend knocked at the little rustic door  and knocked again without response qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet the cottage was not deserted  for a low sound came to our earsa kind of drone of misery and despair  which was indescribably melancholy qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes paused irresolute  and then he glanced back at the road which we had just traversed qzmSEPqzm. 
 a brougham was coming down it  and there could be no mistaking those grey horses qzmSEPqzm. 
  by jove  the doctor is coming back cried holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 that settles it qzmSEPqzm. 
 we are bound to see what it means before he comes qzmSEPqzm. 
  he opened the door and we stepped into the hall qzmSEPqzm. 
 the droning sound swelled louder upon our ears until it became one long  deep wail of distress qzmSEPqzm. 
 it came from upstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes darted up and i followed him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he pushed open a halfclosed door and we both stood appalled at the sight before us qzmSEPqzm. 
  a woman  young and beautiful  was lying dead upon the bed qzmSEPqzm. 
 her calm  pale face  with dim  wideopened blue eyes  looked upward from amid a great tangle of golden hair qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the foot of the bed  half sitting  half kneeling  his face buried in the clothes  was a young man  whose frame was racked by his sobs qzmSEPqzm. 
 so absorbed was he by his bitter grief that he never looked up until holmess hand was on his shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  are you mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 godfrey staunton  yes  yes  i ambut you are too late qzmSEPqzm. 
 she is dead qzmSEPqzm. 
  the man was so dazed that he could not be made to understand that we were anything but doctors who had been sent to his assistance qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes was endeavouring to utter a few words of consolation  and to explain the alarm which had been caused to his friends by his sudden disappearance  when there was a step upon the stairs  and there was the heavy  stern  questioning face of dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  so  gentlemen  said he  you have attained your end  and have certainly chosen a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion qzmSEPqzm. 
 i would not brawl in the presence of death  but i can assure you that if i were a younger man your monstrous conduct would not pass with impunity qzmSEPqzm. 
  excuse me  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong  i think we are a little at crosspurposes   said my friend  with dignity qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you could step downstairs with us we may each be able to give some light to the other upon this miserable affair qzmSEPqzm. 
  a minute later the grim doctor and ourselves were in the sittingroom below qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  sir said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  i wish you to understand  in the first place  that i am not employed by lord mountjames  and that my sympathies in this matter are entirely against that nobleman qzmSEPqzm. 
 when a man is lost it is my duty to ascertain his fate  but having done so the matter ends so far as i am concerned  and so long as there is nothing criminal  i am much more anxious to hush up private scandals than to give them publicity qzmSEPqzm. 
 if  as i imagine  there is no breach of the law in this matter  you can absolutely depend upon my discretion and my cooperation in keeping the facts out of the papers qzmSEPqzm. 
  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 armstrong took a quick step forward and wrung holmes by the hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are a good fellow  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had misjudged you qzmSEPqzm. 
 i thank heaven that my compunction at leaving poor staunton all alone in this plight caused me to turn my carriage back  and so to make your acquaintance qzmSEPqzm. 
 knowing as much as you do  the situation is very easily explained qzmSEPqzm. 
 a year ago godfrey staunton lodged in london for a time  and became passionately attached to his landladys daughter  whom he married qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was as good as she was beautiful  and as intelligent as she was good qzmSEPqzm. 
 no man need be ashamed of such a wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 but godfrey was the heir to this crabbed old nobleman  and it was quite certain that the news of his marriage would have been the end of his inheritance qzmSEPqzm. 
 i knew the lad well  and i loved him for his many excellent qualities qzmSEPqzm. 
 i did all i could to help him to keep things straight qzmSEPqzm. 
 we did our very best to keep the thing from everyone  for when once such a whisper gets about it is not long before everyone has heard it qzmSEPqzm. 
 thanks to this lonely cottage and his own discretion  godfrey has up to now succeeded qzmSEPqzm. 
 their secret was known to no one save to me and to one excellent servant who has at present gone for assistance to trumpington qzmSEPqzm. 
 but at last there came a terrible blow in the shape of dangerous illness to his wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was consumption of the most virulent kind qzmSEPqzm. 
 the poor boy was half crazed with grief  and yet he had to go to london to play this match  for he could not get out of it without explanations which would expose his secret qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tried to cheer him up by a wire  and he sent me one in reply imploring me to do all i could qzmSEPqzm. 
 this was the telegram which you appear in some inexplicable way to have seen qzmSEPqzm. 
 i did not tell him how urgent the danger was  for i knew that he could do no good here  but i sent the truth to the girls father  and he very injudiciously communicated it to godfrey qzmSEPqzm. 
 the result was that he came straight away in a state bordering on frenzy  and has remained in the same state  kneeling at the end of her bed  until this morning death put an end to her sufferings qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is all  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  and i am sure that i can rely upon your discretion and that of your friend qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes grasped the doctors hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  watson  said he  and we passed from that house of grief into the pale sunlight of the winter day qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the abbey grange qzmSEPqzm. 
   it was on a bitterly cold and frosty morning during the winter of  qzmNUMqzm  that i was awakened by a tugging at my shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the candle in his hand shone upon his eager  stooping face and told me at a glance that something was amiss qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  watson  come he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 the game is afoot qzmSEPqzm. 
 not a word into your clothes and come  ten minutes later we were both in a cab and rattling through the silent streets on our way to charing cross station qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first faint winters dawn was beginning to appear  and we could dimly see the occasional figure of an early workman as he passed us  blurred and indistinct in the opalescent london reek qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes nestled in silence into his heavy coat  and i was glad to do the same  for the air was most bitter and neither of us had broken our fast qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was not until we had consumed some hot tea at the station  and taken our places in the kentish train  that we were sufficiently thawed  he to speak and i to listen qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes drew a note from his pocket and read it aloud                 abbey grange  marsham  kent                               qzmNUMqzm  qzmSEPqzm. 
 qzmNUMqzm  a qzmSEPqzm. 
m qzmSEPqzm. 
    my dear mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes i should be very glad of your immediate    assistance in what promises to be a most remarkable case qzmSEPqzm. 
    it is something quite in your line qzmSEPqzm. 
  except for releasing the lady    i will see that everything is kept exactly as i have found it     but i beg you not to lose an instant  as it is difficult to leave    sir eustace there qzmSEPqzm. 
                yours faithfully  stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
  hopkins has called me in seven times  and on each occasion his summons has been entirely justified  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fancy that every one of his cases has found its way into your collection  and i must admit  watson  that you have some power of selection which atones for much which i deplore in your narratives qzmSEPqzm. 
 your fatal habit of looking at everything from the point of view of a story instead of as a scientific exercise has ruined what might have been an instructive and even classical series of demonstrations qzmSEPqzm. 
 you slur over work of the utmost finesse and delicacy in order to dwell upon sensational details which may excite  but cannot possibly instruct  the reader qzmSEPqzm. 
  why do you not write them yourself i said  with some bitterness qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will  my dear watson  i will qzmSEPqzm. 
 at present i am  as you know  fairly busy  but i propose to devote my declining years to the composition of a textbook which shall focus the whole art of detection into one volume qzmSEPqzm. 
 our present research appears to be a case of murder qzmSEPqzm. 
  you think this sir eustace is dead  then  i should say so qzmSEPqzm. 
 hopkinss writing shows considerable agitation  and he is not an emotional man qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  i gather there has been violence  and that the body is left for our inspection qzmSEPqzm. 
 a mere suicide would not have caused him to send for me qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to the release of the lady  it would appear that she has been locked in her room during the tragedy qzmSEPqzm. 
 we are moving in high life  watson  crackling paper  e qzmSEPqzm. 
b qzmSEPqzm. 
 monogram  coatofarms  picturesque address qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think that friend hopkins will live up to his reputation and that we shall have an interesting morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 the crime was committed before twelve last night qzmSEPqzm. 
  how can you possibly tell  by an inspection of the trains and by reckoning the time qzmSEPqzm. 
 the local police had to be called in  they had to communicate with scotland yard  hopkins had to go out  and he in turn had to send for me qzmSEPqzm. 
 all that makes a fair nights work qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  here we are at chislehurst station  and we shall soon set our doubts at rest qzmSEPqzm. 
  a drive of a couple of miles through narrow country lanes brought us to a park gate  which was opened for us by an old lodgekeeper  whose haggard face bore the reflection of some great disaster qzmSEPqzm. 
 the avenue ran through a noble park  between lines of ancient elms  and ended in a low  widespread house  pillared in front after the fashion of palladio qzmSEPqzm. 
 the central part was evidently of a great age and shrouded in ivy  but the large windows showed that modern changes had been carried out  and one wing of the house appeared to be entirely new qzmSEPqzm. 
 the youthful figure and alert  eager face of inspector stanley hopkins confronted us in the open doorway qzmSEPqzm. 
  im very glad you have come  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 and you too  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson but  indeed  if i had my time over again i should not have troubled you  for since the lady has come to herself she has given so clear an account of the affair that there is not much left for us to do qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember that lewisham gang of burglars  what  the three randalls  exactly  the father and two sons qzmSEPqzm. 
 its their work qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have not a doubt of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 they did a job at sydenham a fortnight ago  and were seen and described qzmSEPqzm. 
 rather cool to do another so soon and so near  but it is they  beyond all doubt qzmSEPqzm. 
 its a hanging matter this time qzmSEPqzm. 
  sir eustace is dead  then  yes  his head was knocked in with his own poker qzmSEPqzm. 
  sir eustace brackenstall  the driver tells me qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactlyone of the richest men in kent qzmSEPqzm. 
 lady brackenstall is in the morningroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 poor lady  she has had a most dreadful experience qzmSEPqzm. 
 she seemed half dead when i saw her first qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think you had best see her and hear her account of the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 then we will examine the diningroom together qzmSEPqzm. 
  lady brackenstall was no ordinary person qzmSEPqzm. 
 seldom have i seen so graceful a figure  so womanly a presence  and so beautiful a face qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was a blonde  goldenhaired  blueeyed  and would  no doubt  have had the perfect complexion which goes with such colouring had not her recent experience left her drawn and haggard qzmSEPqzm. 
 her sufferings were physical as well as mental  for over one eye rose a hideous  plumcoloured swelling  which her maid  a tall  austere woman  was bathing assiduously with vinegar and water qzmSEPqzm. 
 the lady lay back exhausted upon a couch  but her quick  observant gaze as we entered the room  and the alert expression of her beautiful features  showed that neither her wits nor her courage had been shaken by her terrible experience qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was enveloped in a loose dressinggown of blue and silver  but a black sequincovered dinnerdress was hung upon the couch beside her qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have told you all that happened  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hopkins  she said  wearily  could you not repeat it for me well  if you think it necessary  i will tell these gentlemen what occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
 have they been in the diningroom yet  i thought they had better hear your ladyships story first qzmSEPqzm. 
  i shall be glad when you can arrange matters qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is horrible to me to think of him still lying there qzmSEPqzm. 
 she shuddered and buried her face in her hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 as she did so the loose gown fell back from her forearms qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes uttered an exclamation qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have other injuries  madam what is this two vivid red spots stood out on one of the white  round limbs qzmSEPqzm. 
 she hastily covered it qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has no connection with the hideous business of last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you and your friend will sit down i will tell you all i can qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am the wife of sir eustace brackenstall qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been married about a year qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose that it is no use my attempting to conceal that our marriage has not been a happy one qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fear that all our neighbours would tell you that  even if i were to attempt to deny it qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps the fault may be partly mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was brought up in the freer  less conventional atmosphere of south australia  and this english life  with its proprieties and its primness  is not congenial to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the main reason lies in the one fact which is notorious to everyone  and that is that sir eustace was a confirmed drunkard qzmSEPqzm. 
 to be with such a man for an hour is unpleasant qzmSEPqzm. 
 can you imagine what it means for a sensitive and highspirited woman to be tied to him for day and night it is a sacrilege  a crime  a villainy to hold that such a marriage is binding qzmSEPqzm. 
 i say that these monstrous laws of yours will bring a curse upon the landheaven will not let such wickedness endure qzmSEPqzm. 
 for an instant she sat up  her cheeks flushed  and her eyes blazing from under the terrible mark upon her brow qzmSEPqzm. 
 then the strong  soothing hand of the austere maid drew her head down on to the cushion  and the wild anger died away into passionate sobbing qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last she continued  i will tell you about last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are aware  perhaps  that in this house all servants sleep in the modern wing qzmSEPqzm. 
 this central block is made up of the dwellingrooms  with the kitchen behind and our bedroom above qzmSEPqzm. 
 my maid theresa sleeps above my room qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no one else  and no sound could alarm those who are in the farther wing qzmSEPqzm. 
 this must have been well known to the robbers  or they would not have acted as they did qzmSEPqzm. 
  sir eustace retired about halfpast ten qzmSEPqzm. 
 the servants had already gone to their quarters qzmSEPqzm. 
 only my maid was up  and she had remained in her room at the top of the house until i needed her services qzmSEPqzm. 
 i sat until after eleven in this room  absorbed in a book qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i walked round to see that all was right before i went upstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was my custom to do this myself  for  as i have explained  sir eustace was not always to be trusted qzmSEPqzm. 
 i went into the kitchen  the butlers pantry  the gunroom  the billiardroom  the drawingroom  and finally the diningroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i approached the window  which is covered with thick curtains  i suddenly felt the wind blow upon my face and realized that it was open qzmSEPqzm. 
 i flung the curtain aside and found myself face to face with a broadshouldered  elderly man who had just stepped into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 the window is a long french one  which really forms a door leading to the lawn qzmSEPqzm. 
 i held my bedroom candle lit in my hand  and  by its light  behind the first man i saw two others  who were in the act of entering qzmSEPqzm. 
 i stepped back  but the fellow was on me in an instant qzmSEPqzm. 
 he caught me first by the wrist and then by the throat qzmSEPqzm. 
 i opened my mouth to scream  but he struck me a savage blow with his fist over the eye  and felled me to the ground qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must have been unconscious for a few minutes  for when i came to myself i found that they had torn down the bellrope and had secured me tightly to the oaken chair which stands at the head of the diningroom table qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was so firmly bound that i could not move  and a handkerchief round my mouth prevented me from uttering any sound qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was at this instant that my unfortunate husband entered the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had evidently heard some suspicious sounds  and he came prepared for such a scene as he found qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was dressed in his shirt and trousers  with his favourite blackthorn cudgel in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 he rushed at one of the burglars  but anotherit was the elderly manstooped  picked the poker out of the grate  and struck him a horrible blow as he passed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he fell without a groan  and never moved again qzmSEPqzm. 
 i fainted once more  but again it could only have been a very few minutes during which i was insensible qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i opened my eyes i found that they had collected the silver from the sideboard  and they had drawn a bottle of wine which stood there qzmSEPqzm. 
 each of them had a glass in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have already told you  have i not  that one was elderly  with a beard  and the others young  hairless lads qzmSEPqzm. 
 they might have been a father with his two sons qzmSEPqzm. 
 they talked together in whispers qzmSEPqzm. 
 then they came over and made sure that i was still securely bound qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally they withdrew  closing the window after them qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was quite a quarter of an hour before i got my mouth free qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i did so my screams brought the maid to my assistance qzmSEPqzm. 
 the other servants were soon alarmed  and we sent for the local police  who instantly communicated with london qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is really all that i can tell you  gentlemen  and i trust that it will not be necessary for me to go over so painful a story again qzmSEPqzm. 
  any questions  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes asked hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
  i will not impose any further tax upon lady brackenstalls patience and time  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 before i go into the diningroom i should like to hear your experience qzmSEPqzm. 
 he looked at the maid qzmSEPqzm. 
  i saw the men before ever they came into the house  said she qzmSEPqzm. 
 as i sat by my bedroom window i saw three men in the moonlight down by the lodge gate yonder  but i thought nothing of it at the time qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was more than an hour after that i heard my mistress scream  and down i ran  to find her  poor lamb  just as she says  and him on the floor with his blood and brains over the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was enough to drive a woman out of her wits  tied there  and her very dress spotted with him  but she never wanted courage  did miss mary fraser of adelaide  and lady brackenstall of abbey grange hasnt learned new ways qzmSEPqzm. 
 youve questioned her long enough  you gentlemen  and now she is coming to her own room  just with her old theresa  to get the rest that she badly needs qzmSEPqzm. 
  with a motherly tenderness the gaunt woman put her arm round her mistress and led her from the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  she has been with her all her life  said hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 nursed her as a baby  and came with her to england when they first left australia eighteen months ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 theresa wright is her name  and the kind of maid you dont pick up nowadays qzmSEPqzm. 
 this way  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  if you please  the keen interest had passed out of holmess expressive face  and i knew that with the mystery all the charm of the case had departed qzmSEPqzm. 
 there still remained an arrest to be effected  but what were these commonplace rogues that he should soil his hands with them an abstruse and learned specialist who finds that he has been called in for a case of measles would experience something of the annoyance which i read in my friends eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 yet the scene in the diningroom of the abbey grange was sufficiently strange to arrest his attention and to recall his waning interest qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was a very large and high chamber  with carved oak ceiling  oaken panelling  and a fine array of deers heads and ancient weapons around the walls qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the farther end from the door was the high french window of which we had heard qzmSEPqzm. 
 three smaller windows on the righthand side filled the apartment with cold winter sunshine qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the left was a large  deep fireplace  with a massive  overhanging oak mantelpiece qzmSEPqzm. 
 beside the fireplace was a heavy oaken chair with arms and crossbars at the bottom qzmSEPqzm. 
 in and out through the open woodwork was woven a crimson cord  which was secured at each side to the crosspiece below qzmSEPqzm. 
 in releasing the lady the cord had been slipped off her  but the knots with which it had been secured still remained qzmSEPqzm. 
 these details only struck our attention afterwards  for our thoughts were entirely absorbed by the terrible object which lay upon the tigerskin hearthrug in front of the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was the body of a tall  wellmade man  about forty years of age qzmSEPqzm. 
 he lay upon his back  his face upturned  with his white teeth grinning through his short black beard qzmSEPqzm. 
 his two clenched hands were raised above his head  and a heavy blackthorn stick lay across them qzmSEPqzm. 
 his dark  handsome  aquiline features were convulsed into a spasm of vindictive hatred  which had set his dead face in a terribly fiendish expression qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had evidently been in his bed when the alarm had broken out  for he wore a foppish embroidered nightshirt  and his bare feet projected from his trousers qzmSEPqzm. 
 his head was horribly injured  and the whole room bore witness to the savage ferocity of the blow which had struck him down qzmSEPqzm. 
 beside him lay the heavy poker  bent into a curve by the concussion qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes examined both it and the indescribable wreck which it had wrought qzmSEPqzm. 
  he must be a powerful man  this elder randall  he remarked qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  said hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have some record of the fellow  and he is a rough customer qzmSEPqzm. 
  you should have no difficulty in getting him qzmSEPqzm. 
  not the slightest qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have been on the lookout for him  and there was some idea that he had got away to america qzmSEPqzm. 
 now that we know the gang are here i dont see how they can escape qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have the news at every seaport already  and a reward will be offered before evening qzmSEPqzm. 
 what beats me is how they could have done so mad a thing  knowing that the lady could describe them  and that we could not fail to recognise the description qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 one would have expected that they would have silenced lady brackenstall as well qzmSEPqzm. 
  they may not have realized  i suggested  that she had recovered from her faint qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is likely enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 if she seemed to be senseless they would not take her life qzmSEPqzm. 
 what about this poor fellow  hopkins i seem to have heard some queer stories about him qzmSEPqzm. 
  he was a goodhearted man when he was sober  but a perfect fiend when he was drunk  or rather when he was half drunk  for he seldom really went the whole way qzmSEPqzm. 
 the devil seemed to be in him at such times  and he was capable of anything qzmSEPqzm. 
 from what i hear  in spite of all his wealth and his title  he very nearly came our way once or twice qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a scandal about his drenching a dog with petroleum and setting it on fireher ladyships dog  to make the matter worseand that was only hushed up with difficulty qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he threw a decanter at that maid  theresa wright  there was trouble about that qzmSEPqzm. 
 on the whole  and between ourselves  it will be a brighter house without him qzmSEPqzm. 
 what are you looking at now  holmes was down on his knees examining with great attention the knots upon the red cord with which the lady had been secured qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he carefully scrutinized the broken and frayed end where it had snapped off when the burglar had dragged it down qzmSEPqzm. 
  when this was pulled down the bell in the kitchen must have rung loudly  he remarked qzmSEPqzm. 
  no one could hear it qzmSEPqzm. 
 the kitchen stands right at the back of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
  how did the burglar know no one would hear it how dared he pull at a bellrope in that reckless fashion  exactly  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 you put the very question which i have asked myself again and again qzmSEPqzm. 
 there can be no doubt that this fellow must have known the house and its habits qzmSEPqzm. 
 he must have perfectly understood that the servants would all be in bed at that comparatively early hour  and that no one could possibly hear a bell ring in the kitchen qzmSEPqzm. 
 therefore he must have been in close league with one of the servants qzmSEPqzm. 
 surely that is evident qzmSEPqzm. 
 but there are eight servants  and all of good character qzmSEPqzm. 
  other things being equal  said holmes  one would suspect the one at whose head the master threw a decanter qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet that would involve treachery towards the mistress to whom this woman seems devoted qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  well  the point is a minor one  and when you have randall you will probably find no difficulty in securing his accomplice qzmSEPqzm. 
 the ladys story certainly seems to be corroborated  if it needed corroboration  by every detail which we see before us qzmSEPqzm. 
 he walked to the french window and threw it open qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are no signs here  but the ground is iron hard  and one would not expect them qzmSEPqzm. 
 i see that these candles on the mantelpiece have been lighted qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  it was by their light and that of the ladys bedroom candle that the burglars saw their way about qzmSEPqzm. 
  and what did they take  well  they did not take muchonly halfadozen articles of plate off the sideboard qzmSEPqzm. 
 lady brackenstall thinks that they were themselves so disturbed by the death of sir eustace that they did not ransack the house as they would otherwise have done qzmSEPqzm. 
  no doubt that is true qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet they drank some wine  i understand qzmSEPqzm. 
  to steady their own nerves qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 these three glasses upon the sideboard have been untouched  i suppose  yes  and the bottle stands as they left it qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us look at it qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa halloa what is this  the three glasses were grouped together  all of them tinged with wine  and one of them containing some dregs of beeswing qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bottle stood near them  twothirds full  and beside it lay a long  deeplystained cork qzmSEPqzm. 
 its appearance and the dust upon the bottle showed that it was no common vintage which the murderers had enjoyed qzmSEPqzm. 
  a change had come over holmess manner qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had lost his listless expression  and again i saw an alert light of interest in his keen  deepset eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
 he raised the cork and examined it minutely qzmSEPqzm. 
  how did they draw it he asked qzmSEPqzm. 
  hopkins pointed to a halfopened drawer qzmSEPqzm. 
 in it lay some table linen and a large corkscrew qzmSEPqzm. 
  did lady brackenstall say that screw was used  no  you remember that she was senseless at the moment when the bottle was opened qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so qzmSEPqzm. 
 as a matter of fact that screw was not used qzmSEPqzm. 
 this bottle was opened by a pocketscrew  probably contained in a knife  and not more than an inch and a half long qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you examine the top of the cork you will observe that the screw was driven in three times before the cork was extracted qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has never been transfixed qzmSEPqzm. 
 this long screw would have transfixed it and drawn it with a single pull qzmSEPqzm. 
 when you catch this fellow you will find that he has one of these multiplex knives in his possession qzmSEPqzm. 
  excellent said hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
  but these glasses do puzzle me  i confess qzmSEPqzm. 
 lady brackenstall actually saw the three men drinking  did she not  yes  she was clear about that qzmSEPqzm. 
  then there is an end of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what more is to be said and yet you must admit that the three glasses are very remarkable  hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 what  you see nothing remarkable well  well  let it pass qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps when a man has special knowledge and special powers like my own it rather encourages him to seek a complex explanation when a simpler one is at hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 of course  it must be a mere chance about the glasses qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  good morning  hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dont see that i can be of any use to you  and you appear to have your case very clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will let me know when randall is arrested  and any further developments which may occur qzmSEPqzm. 
 i trust that i shall soon have to congratulate you upon a successful conclusion qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  watson  i fancy that we may employ ourselves more profitably at home qzmSEPqzm. 
  during our return journey i could see by holmess face that he was much puzzled by something which he had observed qzmSEPqzm. 
 every now and then  by an effort  he would throw off the impression and talk as if the matter were clear  but then his doubts would settle down upon him again  and his knitted brows and abstracted eyes would show that his thoughts had gone back once more to the great diningroom of the abbey grange in which this midnight tragedy had been enacted qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last  by a sudden impulse  just as our train was crawling out of a suburban station  he sprang on to the platform and pulled me out after him qzmSEPqzm. 
  excuse me  my dear fellow  said he  as we watched the rear carriages of our train disappearing round a curve  i am sorry to make you the victim of what may seem a mere whim  but on my life  watson  i simply cant leave that case in this condition qzmSEPqzm. 
 every instinct that i possess cries out against it qzmSEPqzm. 
 its wrongits all wrongill swear that its wrong qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet the ladys story was complete  the maids corroboration was sufficient  the detail was fairly exact qzmSEPqzm. 
 what have i to put against that three wineglasses  that is all qzmSEPqzm. 
 but if i had not taken things for granted  if i had examined everything with the care which i would have shown had we approached the case de novo and had no cutanddried story to warp my mind  would i not then have found something more definite to go upon of course i should qzmSEPqzm. 
 sit down on this bench  watson  until a train for chislehurst arrives  and allow me to lay the evidence before you  imploring you in the first instance to dismiss from your mind the idea that anything which the maid or her mistress may have said must necessarily be true qzmSEPqzm. 
 the ladys charming personality must not be permitted to warp our judgment qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely there are details in her story which  if we looked at it in cold blood  would excite our suspicion qzmSEPqzm. 
 these burglars made a considerable haul at sydenham a fortnight ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 some account of them and of their appearance was in the papers  and would naturally occur to anyone who wished to invent a story in which imaginary robbers should play a part qzmSEPqzm. 
 as a matter of fact  burglars who have done a good stroke of business are  as a rule  only too glad to enjoy the proceeds in peace and quiet without embarking on another perilous undertaking qzmSEPqzm. 
 again  it is unusual for burglars to operate at so early an hour  it is unusual for burglars to strike a lady to prevent her screaming  since one would imagine that was the sure way to make her scream  it is unusual for them to commit murder when their numbers are sufficient to overpower one man  it is unusual for them to be content with a limited plunder when there is much more within their reach  and finally i should say that it was very unusual for such men to leave a bottle half empty qzmSEPqzm. 
 how do all these unusuals strike you  watson  their cumulative effect is certainly considerable  and yet each of them is quite possible in itself qzmSEPqzm. 
 the most unusual thing of all  as it seems to me  is that the lady should be tied to the chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i am not so clear about that  watson  for it is evident that they must either kill her or else secure her in such a way that she could not give immediate notice of their escape qzmSEPqzm. 
 but at any rate i have shown  have i not  that there is a certain element of improbability about the ladys story and now on the top of this comes the incident of the wineglasses qzmSEPqzm. 
  what about the wineglasses  can you see them in your minds eye  i see them clearly qzmSEPqzm. 
  we are told that three men drank from them qzmSEPqzm. 
 does that strike you as likely  why not there was wine in each glass qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly  but there was beeswing only in one glass qzmSEPqzm. 
 you must have noticed that fact qzmSEPqzm. 
 what does that suggest to your mind  the last glass filled would be most likely to contain beeswing qzmSEPqzm. 
  not at all qzmSEPqzm. 
 the bottle was full of it  and it is inconceivable that the first two glasses were clear and the third heavily charged with it qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are two possible explanations  and only two qzmSEPqzm. 
 one is that after the second glass was filled the bottle was violently agitated  and so the third glass received the beeswing qzmSEPqzm. 
 that does not appear probable qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  no  i am sure that i am right qzmSEPqzm. 
  what  then  do you suppose  that only two glasses were used  and that the dregs of both were poured into a third glass  so as to give the false impression that three people had been here qzmSEPqzm. 
 in that way all the beeswing would be in the last glass  would it not yes  i am convinced that this is so qzmSEPqzm. 
 but if i have hit upon the true explanation of this one small phenomenon  then in an instant the case rises from the commonplace to the exceedingly remarkable  for it can only mean that lady brackenstall and her maid have deliberately lied to us  that not one word of their story is to be believed  that they have some very strong reason for covering the real criminal  and that we must construct our case for ourselves without any help from them qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is the mission which now lies before us  and here  watson  is the chislehurst train qzmSEPqzm. 
  the household of the abbey grange were much surprised at our return  but sherlock holmes  finding that stanley hopkins had gone off to report to headquarters  took possession of the diningroom  locked the door upon the inside  and devoted himself for two hours to one of those minute and laborious investigations which formed the solid basis on which his brilliant edifices of deduction were reared qzmSEPqzm. 
 seated in a corner like an interested student who observes the demonstration of his professor  i followed every step of that remarkable research qzmSEPqzm. 
 the window  the curtains  the carpet  the chair  the ropeeach in turn was minutely examined and duly pondered qzmSEPqzm. 
 the body of the unfortunate baronet had been removed  but all else remained as we had seen it in the morning qzmSEPqzm. 
 then  to my astonishment  holmes climbed up on to the massive mantelpiece qzmSEPqzm. 
 far above his head hung the few inches of red cord which were still attached to the wire qzmSEPqzm. 
 for a long time he gazed upward at it  and then in an attempt to get nearer to it he rested his knee upon a wooden bracket on the wall qzmSEPqzm. 
 this brought his hand within a few inches of the broken end of the rope  but it was not this so much as the bracket itself which seemed to engage his attention qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally he sprang down with an ejaculation of satisfaction qzmSEPqzm. 
  its all right  watson  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have got our caseone of the most remarkable in our collection qzmSEPqzm. 
 but  dear me  how slowwitted i have been  and how nearly i have committed the blunder of my lifetime now  i think that with a few missing links my chain is almost complete qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have got your men  man  watson  man qzmSEPqzm. 
 only one  but a very formidable person qzmSEPqzm. 
 strong as a lionwitness the blow that bent that poker qzmSEPqzm. 
 six foot three in height  active as a squirrel  dexterous with his fingers  finally  remarkably quickwitted  for this whole ingenious story is of his concoction qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  watson  we have come upon the handiwork of a very remarkable individual qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet in that bellrope he has given us a clue which should not have left us a doubt qzmSEPqzm. 
  where was the clue  well  if you were to pull down a bellrope  watson  where would you expect it to break surely at the spot where it is attached to the wire qzmSEPqzm. 
 why should it break three inches from the top as this one has done  because it is frayed there  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 this end  which we can examine  is frayed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was cunning enough to do that with his knife qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the other end is not frayed qzmSEPqzm. 
 you could not observe that from here  but if you were on the mantelpiece you would see that it is cut clean off without any mark of fraying whatever qzmSEPqzm. 
 you can reconstruct what occurred qzmSEPqzm. 
 the man needed the rope qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would not tear it down for fear of giving the alarm by ringing the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
 what did he do he sprang up on the mantelpiece  could not quite reach it  put his knee on the bracketyou will see the impression in the dustand so got his knife to bear upon the cord qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could not reach the place by at least three inches  from which i infer that he is at least three inches a bigger man than i qzmSEPqzm. 
 look at that mark upon the seat of the oaken chair what is it  blood qzmSEPqzm. 
  undoubtedly it is blood qzmSEPqzm. 
 this alone puts the ladys story out of court qzmSEPqzm. 
 if she were seated on the chair when the crime was done  how comes that mark no  no  she was placed in the chair after the death of her husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill wager that the black dress shows a corresponding mark to this qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have not yet met our waterloo  watson  but this is our marengo  for it begins in defeat and ends in victory qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should like now to have a few words with the nurse theresa qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must be wary for awhile  if we are to get the information which we want qzmSEPqzm. 
  she was an interesting person  this stern australian nurse qzmSEPqzm. 
 taciturn  suspicious  ungracious  it took some time before holmess pleasant manner and frank acceptance of all that she said thawed her into a corresponding amiability qzmSEPqzm. 
 she did not attempt to conceal her hatred for her late employer qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  it is true that he threw the decanter at me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i heard him call my mistress a name  and i told him that he would not dare to speak so if her brother had been there qzmSEPqzm. 
 then it was that he threw it at me qzmSEPqzm. 
 he might have thrown a dozen if he had but left my bonny bird alone qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was for ever illtreating her  and she too proud to complain qzmSEPqzm. 
 she will not even tell me all that he has done to her qzmSEPqzm. 
 she never told me of those marks on her arm that you saw this morning  but i know very well that they come from a stab with a hatpin qzmSEPqzm. 
 the sly fiendheaven forgive me that i should speak of him so  now that he is dead  but a fiend he was if ever one walked the earth qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was all honey when first we met him  only eighteen months ago  and we both feel as if it were eighteen years qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had only just arrived in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  it was her first voyageshe had never been from home before qzmSEPqzm. 
 he won her with his title and his money and his false london ways qzmSEPqzm. 
 if she made a mistake she has paid for it  if ever a woman did qzmSEPqzm. 
 what month did we meet him well  i tell you it was just after we arrived qzmSEPqzm. 
 we arrived in june  and it was july qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were married in january of last year qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  she is down in the morningroom again  and i have no doubt she will see you  but you must not ask too much of her  for she has gone through all that flesh and blood will stand qzmSEPqzm. 
  lady brackenstall was reclining on the same couch  but looked brighter than before qzmSEPqzm. 
 the maid had entered with us  and began once more to foment the bruise upon her mistresss brow qzmSEPqzm. 
  i hope  said the lady  that you have not come to crossexamine me again  no  holmes answered  in his gentlest voice  i will not cause you any unnecessary trouble  lady brackenstall  and my whole desire is to make things easy for you  for i am convinced that you are a muchtried woman qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you will treat me as a friend and trust me you may find that i will justify your trust qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you want me to do  to tell me the truth qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  no  no  lady brackenstall  it is no use qzmSEPqzm. 
 you may have heard of any little reputation which i possess qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will stake it all on the fact that your story is an absolute fabrication qzmSEPqzm. 
  mistress and maid were both staring at holmes with pale faces and frightened eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are an impudent fellow cried theresa qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you mean to say that my mistress has told a lie  holmes rose from his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you nothing to tell me  i have told you everything qzmSEPqzm. 
  think once more  lady brackenstall qzmSEPqzm. 
 would it not be better to be frank  for an instant there was hesitation in her beautiful face qzmSEPqzm. 
 then some new strong thought caused it to set like a mask qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have told you all i know qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes took his hat and shrugged his shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am sorry  he said  and without another word we left the room and the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a pond in the park  and to this my friend led the way qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was frozen over  but a single hole was left for the convenience of a solitary swan qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes gazed at it and then passed on to the lodge gate qzmSEPqzm. 
 there he scribbled a short note for stanley hopkins and left it with the lodgekeeper qzmSEPqzm. 
  it may be a hit or it may be a miss  but we are bound to do something for friend hopkins  just to justify this second visit  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will not quite take him into my confidence yet qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think our next scene of operations must be the shipping office of the adelaidesouthampton line  which stands at the end of pall mall  if i remember right qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a second line of steamers which connect south australia with england  but we will draw the larger cover first qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmess card sent in to the manager ensured instant attention  and he was not long in acquiring all the information which he needed qzmSEPqzm. 
 in june of  qzmNUMqzm  only one of their line had reached a home port qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the rock of gibraltar  their largest and best boat qzmSEPqzm. 
 a reference to the passenger list showed that miss fraser of adelaide  with her maid  had made the voyage in her qzmSEPqzm. 
 the boat was now on her way to australia  somewhere to the south of the suez canal qzmSEPqzm. 
 her officers were the same as in  qzmNUMqzm   with one exception qzmSEPqzm. 
 the first officer  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 jack croker  had been made a captain and was to take charge of their new ship  the bass rock  sailing in two days time from southampton qzmSEPqzm. 
 he lived at sydenham  but he was likely to be in that morning for instructions  if we cared to wait for him qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes had no desire to see him  but would be glad to know more about his record and character qzmSEPqzm. 
  his record was magnificent qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was not an officer in the fleet to touch him qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to his character  he was reliable on duty  but a wild  desperate fellow off the deck of his ship  hotheaded  excitable  but loyal  honest  and kindhearted qzmSEPqzm. 
 that was the pith of the information with which holmes left the office of the adelaidesouthampton company qzmSEPqzm. 
 thence he drove to scotland yard  but instead of entering he sat in his cab with his brows drawn down  lost in profound thought qzmSEPqzm. 
 finally he drove round to the charing cross telegraph office  sent off a message  and then  at last  we made for baker street once more qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  i couldnt do it  watson  said he  as we reentered our room qzmSEPqzm. 
 once that warrant was made out nothing on earth would save him qzmSEPqzm. 
 once or twice in my career i feel that i have done more real harm by my discovery of the criminal than ever he had done by his crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have learned caution now  and i had rather play tricks with the law of england than with my own conscience qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us know a little more before we act qzmSEPqzm. 
  before evening we had a visit from inspector stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 things were not going very well with him qzmSEPqzm. 
  i believe that you are a wizard  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i really do sometimes think that you have powers that are not human qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  how on earth could you know that the stolen silver was at the bottom of that pond  i didnt know it qzmSEPqzm. 
  but you told me to examine it qzmSEPqzm. 
  you got it  then  yes  i got it qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am very glad if i have helped you qzmSEPqzm. 
  but you havent helped me qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have made the affair far more difficult qzmSEPqzm. 
 what sort of burglars are they who steal silver and then throw it into the nearest pond  it was certainly rather eccentric behaviour qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was merely going on the idea that if the silver had been taken by persons who did not want it  who merely took it for a blind as it were  then they would naturally be anxious to get rid of it qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why should such an idea cross your mind  well  i thought it was possible qzmSEPqzm. 
 when they came out through the french window there was the pond  with one tempting little hole in the ice  right in front of their noses qzmSEPqzm. 
 could there be a better hidingplace  ah  a hidingplacethat is better cried stanley hopkins qzmSEPqzm. 
 yes  yes  i see it all now it was early  there were folk upon the roads  they were afraid of being seen with the silver  so they sank it in the pond  intending to return for it when the coast was clear qzmSEPqzm. 
 excellent  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmesthat is better than your idea of a blind qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so  you have got an admirable theory qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have no doubt that my own ideas were quite wild  but you must admit that they have ended in discovering the silver qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  sir  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was all your doing qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i have had a bad setback qzmSEPqzm. 
  a setback  yes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the randall gang were arrested in new york this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  dear me  hopkins that is certainly rather against your theory that they committed a murder in kent last night qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is fatal  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  absolutely fatal qzmSEPqzm. 
 still  there are other gangs of three besides the randalls  or it may be some new gang of which the police have never heard qzmSEPqzm. 
  quite so  it is perfectly possible qzmSEPqzm. 
 what  are you off  yes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  there is no rest for me until i have got to the bottom of the business qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose you have no hint to give me  i have given you one qzmSEPqzm. 
  which  well  i suggested a blind qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  why  ah  thats the question  of course qzmSEPqzm. 
 but i commend the idea to your mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 you might possibly find that there was something in it qzmSEPqzm. 
 you wont stop for dinner well  goodbye  and let us know how you get on qzmSEPqzm. 
  dinner was over and the table cleared before holmes alluded to the matter again qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had lit his pipe and held his slippered feet to the cheerful blaze of the fire qzmSEPqzm. 
 suddenly he looked at his watch qzmSEPqzm. 
  i expect developments  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  when  nowwithin a few minutes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dare say you thought i acted rather badly to stanley hopkins just now  i trust your judgment qzmSEPqzm. 
  a very sensible reply  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 you must look at it this way what i know is unofficial  what he knows is official qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have the right to private judgment  but he has none qzmSEPqzm. 
 he must disclose all  or he is a traitor to his service qzmSEPqzm. 
 in a doubtful case i would not put him in so painful a position  and so i reserve my information until my own mind is clear upon the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  but when will that be  the time has come qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will now be present at the last scene of a remarkable little drama qzmSEPqzm. 
  there was a sound upon the stairs  and our door was opened to admit as fine a specimen of manhood as ever passed through it qzmSEPqzm. 
 he was a very tall young man  goldenmoustached  blueeyed  with a skin which had been burned by tropical suns  and a springy step which showed that the huge frame was as active as it was strong qzmSEPqzm. 
 he closed the door behind him  and then he stood with clenched hands and heaving breast  choking down some overmastering emotion qzmSEPqzm. 
  sit down  captain croker qzmSEPqzm. 
 you got my telegram  our visitor sank into an armchair and looked from one to the other of us with questioning eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  i got your telegram  and i came at the hour you said qzmSEPqzm. 
 i heard that you had been down to the office qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was no getting away from you qzmSEPqzm. 
 lets hear the worst qzmSEPqzm. 
 what are you going to do with me arrest me speak out  man you cant sit there and play with me like a cat with a mouse qzmSEPqzm. 
  give him a cigar  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 bite on that  captain croker  and dont let your nerves run away with you qzmSEPqzm. 
 i should not sit here smoking with you if i thought that you were a common criminal  you may be sure of that qzmSEPqzm. 
 be frank with me  and we may do some good qzmSEPqzm. 
 play tricks with me  and ill crush you qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you wish me to do  to give me a true account of all that happened at the abbey grange last nighta true account  mind you  with nothing added and nothing taken off qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know so much already that if you go one inch off the straight ill blow this police whistle from my window and the affair goes out of my hands for ever qzmSEPqzm. 
  the sailor thought for a little qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he struck his leg with his great  sunburned hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  ill chance it  he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
 i believe you are a man of your word  and a white man  and ill tell you the whole story qzmSEPqzm. 
 but one thing i will say first qzmSEPqzm. 
 so far as i am concerned i regret nothing and i fear nothing  and i would do it all again and be proud of the job qzmSEPqzm. 
 curse the beast  if he had as many lives as a cat he would owe them all to me but its the lady  marymary fraserfor never will i call her by that accursed name qzmSEPqzm. 
 when i think of getting her into trouble  i who would give my life just to bring one smile to her dear face  its that that turns my soul into water qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yetand yetwhat less could i do ill tell you my story  gentlemen  and then ill ask you as man to man what less could i do qzmSEPqzm. 
  i must go back a bit qzmSEPqzm. 
 you seem to know everything  so i expect that you know that i met her when she was a passenger and i was first officer of the rock of gibraltar qzmSEPqzm. 
 from the first day i met her she was the only woman to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 every day of that voyage i loved her more  and many a time since have i kneeled down in the darkness of the night watch and kissed the deck of that ship because i knew her dear feet had trod it qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was never engaged to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 she treated me as fairly as ever a woman treated a man qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have no complaint to make qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was all love on my side  and all good comradeship and friendship on hers qzmSEPqzm. 
 when we parted she was a free woman  but i could never again be a free man qzmSEPqzm. 
  next time i came back from sea i heard of her marriage qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  why shouldnt she marry whom she liked title and moneywho could carry them better than she she was born for all that is beautiful and dainty qzmSEPqzm. 
 i didnt grieve over her marriage qzmSEPqzm. 
 i was not such a selfish hound as that qzmSEPqzm. 
 i just rejoiced that good luck had come her way  and that she had not thrown herself away on a penniless sailor qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats how i loved mary fraser qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  i never thought to see her again  but last voyage i was promoted  and the new boat was not yet launched  so i had to wait for a couple of months with my people at sydenham qzmSEPqzm. 
 one day out in a country lane i met theresa wright  her old maid qzmSEPqzm. 
 she told me about her  about him  about everything qzmSEPqzm. 
 i tell you  gentlemen  it nearly drove me mad qzmSEPqzm. 
 this drunken hound  that he should dare to raise his hand to her whose boots he was not worthy to lick i met theresa again qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i met mary herselfand met her again qzmSEPqzm. 
 then she would meet me no more qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the other day i had a notice that i was to start on my voyage within a week  and i determined that i would see her once before i left qzmSEPqzm. 
 theresa was always my friend  for she loved mary and hated this villain almost as much as i did qzmSEPqzm. 
 from her i learned the ways of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 mary used to sit up reading in her own little room downstairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 i crept round there last night and scratched at the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 at first she would not open to me  but in her heart i know that now she loves me  and she could not leave me in the frosty night qzmSEPqzm. 
 she whispered to me to come round to the big front window  and i found it open before me so as to let me into the diningroom qzmSEPqzm. 
 again i heard from her own lips things that made my blood boil  and again i cursed this brute who mishandled the woman that i loved qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  gentlemen  i was standing with her just inside the window  in all innocence  as heaven is my judge  when he rushed like a madman into the room  called her the vilest name that a man could use to a woman  and welted her across the face with the stick he had in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had sprung for the poker  and it was a fair fight between us qzmSEPqzm. 
 see here on my arm where his first blow fell qzmSEPqzm. 
 then it was my turn  and i went through him as if he had been a rotten pumpkin qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you think i was sorry not i it was his life or mine  but far more than that it was his life or hers  for how could i leave her in the power of this madman that was how i killed him qzmSEPqzm. 
 was i wrong well  then  what would either of you gentlemen have done if you had been in my position  she had screamed when he struck her  and that brought old theresa down from the room above qzmSEPqzm. 
 there was a bottle of wine on the sideboard  and i opened it and poured a little between marys lips  for she was half dead with the shock qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i took a drop myself qzmSEPqzm. 
 theresa was as cool as ice  and it was her plot as much as mine qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must make it appear that burglars had done the thing qzmSEPqzm. 
 theresa kept on repeating our story to her mistress  while i swarmed up and cut the rope of the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i lashed her in her chair  and frayed out the end of the rope to make it look natural  else they would wonder how in the world a burglar could have got up there to cut it qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i gathered up a few plates and pots of silver  to carry out the idea of a robbery  and there i left them with orders to give the alarm when i had a quarter of an hours start qzmSEPqzm. 
 i dropped the silver into the pond and made off for sydenham  feeling that for once in my life i had done a real good nights work qzmSEPqzm. 
 and thats the truth and the whole truth  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  if it costs me my neck qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes smoked for some time in silence qzmSEPqzm. 
 then he crossed the room and shook our visitor by the hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  thats what i think  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know that every word is true  for you have hardly said a word which i did not know qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one but an acrobat or a sailor could have got up to that bellrope from the bracket  and no one but a sailor could have made the knots with which the cord was fastened to the chair qzmSEPqzm. 
 only once had this lady been brought into contact with sailors  and that was on her voyage  and it was someone of her own class of life  since she was trying hard to shield him and so showing that she loved him qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see how easy it was for me to lay my hands upon you when once i had started upon the right trail qzmSEPqzm. 
  i thought the police never could have seen through our dodge qzmSEPqzm. 
  and the police havent  nor will they  to the best of my belief qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  look here  captain croker  this is a very serious matter  though i am willing to admit that you acted under the most extreme provocation to which any man could be subjected qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am not sure that in defence of your own life your action will not be pronounced legitimate qzmSEPqzm. 
 however  that is for a british jury to decide qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile i have so much sympathy for you that if you choose to disappear in the next twentyfour hours i will promise you that no one will hinder you qzmSEPqzm. 
  and then it will all come out  certainly it will come out qzmSEPqzm. 
  the sailor flushed with anger qzmSEPqzm. 
  what sort of proposal is that to make a man i know enough of law to understand that mary would be had as accomplice qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you think i would leave her alone to face the music while i slunk away no  sir  let them do their worst upon me  but for heavens sake  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  find some way of keeping my poor mary out of the courts qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes for a second time held out his hand to the sailor qzmSEPqzm. 
  i was only testing you  and you ring true every time qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  it is a great responsibility that i take upon myself  but i have given hopkins an excellent hint  and if he cant avail himself of it i can do no more qzmSEPqzm. 
 see here  captain croker  well do this in due form of law qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are the prisoner qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson  you are a british jury  and i never met a man who was more eminently fitted to represent one qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am the judge qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  gentleman of the jury  you have heard the evidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty  not guilty  my lord  said i qzmSEPqzm. 
  vox populi  vox dei qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are acquitted  captain croker qzmSEPqzm. 
 so long as the law does not find some other victim you are safe from me qzmSEPqzm. 
 come back to this lady in a year  and may her future and yours justify us in the judgment which we have pronounced this night qzmSEPqzm. 
   the adventure of the second stain qzmSEPqzm. 
   i had intended the adventure of the abbey grange to be the last of those exploits of my friend  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 sherlock holmes  which i should ever communicate to the public qzmSEPqzm. 
 this resolution of mine was not due to any lack of material  since i have notes of many hundreds of cases to which i have never alluded  nor was it caused by any waning interest on the part of my readers in the singular personality and unique methods of this remarkable man qzmSEPqzm. 
 the real reason lay in the reluctance which mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes has shown to the continued publication of his experiences qzmSEPqzm. 
 so long as he was in actual professional practice the records of his successes were of some practical value to him  but since he has definitely retired from london and betaken himself to study and beefarming on the sussex downs  notoriety has become hateful to him  and he has peremptorily requested that his wishes in this matter should be strictly observed qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was only upon my representing to him that i had given a promise that the adventure of the second stain should be published when the times were ripe  and pointing out to him that it is only appropriate that this long series of episodes should culminate in the most important international case which he has ever been called upon to handle  that i at last succeeded in obtaining his consent that a carefullyguarded account of the incident should at last be laid before the public qzmSEPqzm. 
 if in telling the story i seem to be somewhat vague in certain details the public will readily understand that there is an excellent reason for my reticence qzmSEPqzm. 
   it was  then  in a year  and even in a decade  that shall be nameless  that upon one tuesday morning in autumn we found two visitors of european fame within the walls of our humble room in baker street qzmSEPqzm. 
 the one  austere  highnosed  eagleeyed  and dominant  was none other than the illustrious lord bellinger  twice premier of britain qzmSEPqzm. 
 the other  dark  clearcut  and elegant  hardly yet of middle age  and endowed with every beauty of body and of mind  was the right honourable trelawney hope  secretary for european affairs  and the most rising statesman in the country qzmSEPqzm. 
 they sat side by side upon our paperlittered settee  and it was easy to see from their worn and anxious faces that it was business of the most pressing importance which had brought them qzmSEPqzm. 
 the premiers thin  blueveined hands were clasped tightly over the ivory head of his umbrella  and his gaunt  ascetic face looked gloomily from holmes to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 the european secretary pulled nervously at his moustache and fidgeted with the seals of his watchchain qzmSEPqzm. 
  when i discovered my loss  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  which was at eight oclock this morning  i at once informed the prime minister qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was at his suggestion that we have both come to you qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you informed the police  no  sir  said the prime minister  with the quick  decisive manner for which he was famous qzmSEPqzm. 
 we have not done so  nor is it possible that we should do so qzmSEPqzm. 
 to inform the police must  in the long run  mean to inform the public qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is what we particularly desire to avoid qzmSEPqzm. 
  and why  sir  because the document in question is of such immense importance that its publication might very easilyi might almost say probablylead to european complications of the utmost moment qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is not too much to say that peace or war may hang upon the issue qzmSEPqzm. 
 unless its recovery can be attended with the utmost secrecy  then it may as well not be recovered at all  for all that is aimed at by those who have taken it is that its contents should be generally known qzmSEPqzm. 
  i understand qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 trelawney hope  i should be much obliged if you would tell me exactly the circumstances under which this document disappeared qzmSEPqzm. 
  that can be done in a very few words  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 the letterfor it was a letter from a foreign potentatewas received six days ago qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was of such importance that i have never left it in my safe  but i have taken it across each evening to my house in whitehall terrace  and kept it in my bedroom in a locked despatchbox qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was there last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 of that i am certain qzmSEPqzm. 
 i actually opened the box while i was dressing for dinner  and saw the document inside qzmSEPqzm. 
 this morning it was gone qzmSEPqzm. 
 the despatchbox had stood beside the glass upon my dressingtable all night qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am a light sleeper  and so is my wife qzmSEPqzm. 
 we are both prepared to swear that no one could have entered the room during the night qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet i repeat that the paper is gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  what time did you dine  halfpast seven qzmSEPqzm. 
  how long was it before you went to bed  my wife had gone to the theatre qzmSEPqzm. 
 i waited up for her qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was halfpast eleven before we went to our room qzmSEPqzm. 
  then for four hours the despatchbox had lain unguarded  no one is ever permitted to enter that room save the housemaid in the morning  and my valet  or my wifes maid  during the rest of the day qzmSEPqzm. 
 they are both trusty servants who have been with us for some time qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides  neither of them could possibly have known that there was anything more valuable than the ordinary departmental papers in my despatchbox qzmSEPqzm. 
  who did know of the existence of that letter  no one in the house qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely your wife knew  no  sir  i had said nothing to my wife until i missed the paper this morning qzmSEPqzm. 
  the premier nodded approvingly qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have long known  sir  how high is your sense of public duty  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am convinced that in the case of a secret of this importance it would rise superior to the most intimate domestic ties qzmSEPqzm. 
  the european secretary bowed qzmSEPqzm. 
  you do me no more than justice  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 until this morning i have never breathed one word to my wife upon this matter qzmSEPqzm. 
  could she have guessed  no  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  she could not have guessednor could anyone have guessed qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you lost any documents before  no  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  who is there in england who did know of the existence of this letter  each member of the cabinet was informed of it yesterday  but the pledge of secrecy which attends every cabinet meeting was increased by the solemn warning which was given by the prime minister qzmSEPqzm. 
 good heavens  to think that within a few hours i should myself have lost it his handsome face was distorted with a spasm of despair  and his hands tore at his hair qzmSEPqzm. 
 for a moment we caught a glimpse of the natural man  impulsive  ardent  keenly sensitive qzmSEPqzm. 
 the next the aristocratic mask was replaced  and the gentle voice had returned qzmSEPqzm. 
 besides the members of the cabinet there are two  or possibly three  departmental officials who know of the letter qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one else in england  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i assure you qzmSEPqzm. 
  but abroad  i believe that no one abroad has seen it save the man who wrote it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am well convinced that his ministersthat the usual official channels have not been employed qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes considered for some little time qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  sir  i must ask you more particularly what this document is  and why its disappearance should have such momentous consequences  the two statesmen exchanged a quick glance and the premiers shaggy eyebrows gathered in a frown qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  the envelope is a long  thin one of pale blue colour qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a seal of red wax stamped with a crouching lion qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is addressed in large  bold handwriting to  i fear  sir  said holmes  that  interesting and indeed essential as these details are  my inquiries must go more to the root of things qzmSEPqzm. 
 what was the letter  that is a state secret of the utmost importance  and i fear that i cannot tell you  nor do i see that it is necessary qzmSEPqzm. 
 if by the aid of the powers which you are said to possess you can find such an envelope as i describe with its enclosure  you will have deserved well of your country  and earned any reward which it lies in our power to bestow qzmSEPqzm. 
  sherlock holmes rose with a smile qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are two of the most busy men in the country  said he  and in my own small way i have also a good many calls upon me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i regret exceedingly that i cannot help you in this matter  and any continuation of this interview would be a waste of time qzmSEPqzm. 
  the premier sprang to his feet with that quick  fierce gleam of his deepset eyes before which a cabinet has cowered qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am not accustomed  sir he began  but mastered his anger and resumed his seat qzmSEPqzm. 
 for a minute or more we all sat in silence qzmSEPqzm. 
 then the old statesman shrugged his shoulders qzmSEPqzm. 
  we must accept your terms  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt you are right  and it is unreasonable for us to expect you to act unless we give you our entire confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  i agree with you  sir  said the younger statesman qzmSEPqzm. 
  then i will tell you  relying entirely upon your honour and that of your colleague  dr qzmSEPqzm. 
 watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 i may appeal to your patriotism also  for i could not imagine a greater misfortune for the country than that this affair should come out qzmSEPqzm. 
  you may safely trust us qzmSEPqzm. 
  the letter  then  is from a certain foreign potentate who has been ruffled by some recent colonial developments of this country qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has been written hurriedly and upon his own responsibility entirely qzmSEPqzm. 
 inquiries have shown that his ministers know nothing of the matter qzmSEPqzm. 
 at the same time it is couched in so unfortunate a manner  and certain phrases in it are of so provocative a character  that its publication would undoubtedly lead to a most dangerous state of feeling in this country qzmSEPqzm. 
 there would be such a ferment  sir  that i do not hesitate to say that within a week of the publication of that letter this country would be involved in a great war qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes wrote a name upon a slip of paper and handed it to the premier qzmSEPqzm. 
  exactly qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was he qzmSEPqzm. 
 and it is this letterthis letter which may well mean the expenditure of a thousand millions and the lives of a hundred thousand menwhich has become lost in this unaccountable fashion qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you informed the sender  yes  sir  a cipher telegram has been despatched qzmSEPqzm. 
  perhaps he desires the publication of the letter qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  sir  we have strong reason to believe that he already understands that he has acted in an indiscreet and hotheaded manner qzmSEPqzm. 
 it would be a greater blow to him and to his country than to us if this letter were to come out qzmSEPqzm. 
  if this is so  whose interest is it that the letter should come out why should anyone desire to steal it or to publish it  there  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you take me into regions of high international politics qzmSEPqzm. 
 but if you consider the european situation you will have no difficulty in perceiving the motive qzmSEPqzm. 
 the whole of europe is an armed camp qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a double league which makes a fair balance of military power qzmSEPqzm. 
 great britain holds the scales qzmSEPqzm. 
 if britain were driven into war with one confederacy  it would assure the supremacy of the other confederacy  whether they joined in the war or not qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you follow  very clearly qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is then the interest of the enemies of this potentate to secure and publish this letter  so as to make a breach between his country and ours  yes  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  and to whom would this document be sent if it fell into the hands of an enemy  to any of the great chancelleries of europe qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is probably speeding on its way thither at the present instant as fast as steam can take it qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 trelawney hope dropped his head on his chest and groaned aloud qzmSEPqzm. 
 the premier placed his hand kindly upon his shoulder qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is your misfortune  my dear fellow qzmSEPqzm. 
 no one can blame you qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is no precaution which you have neglected qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you are in full possession of the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 what course do you recommend  holmes shook his head mournfully qzmSEPqzm. 
  you think  sir  that unless this document is recovered there will be war  i think it is very probable qzmSEPqzm. 
  then  sir  prepare for war qzmSEPqzm. 
  that is a hard saying  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  consider the facts  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is inconceivable that it was taken after eleventhirty at night  since i understand that mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 hope and his wife were both in the room from that hour until the loss was found out qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was taken  then  yesterday evening between seventhirty and eleventhirty  probably near the earlier hour  since whoever took it evidently knew that it was there and would naturally secure it as early as possible qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  sir  if a document of this importance were taken at that hour  where can it be now no one has any reason to retain it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has been passed rapidly on to those who need it qzmSEPqzm. 
 what chance have we now to overtake or even to trace it it is beyond our reach qzmSEPqzm. 
  the prime minister rose from the settee qzmSEPqzm. 
  what you say is perfectly logical  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i feel that the matter is indeed out of our hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  let us presume  for arguments sake  that the document was taken by the maid or by the valet  they are both old and tried servants qzmSEPqzm. 
  i understand you to say that your room is on the second floor  that there is no entrance from without  and that from within no one could go up unobserved qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must  then  be somebody in the house who has taken it qzmSEPqzm. 
 to whom would the thief take it to one of several international spies and secret agents  whose names are tolerably familiar to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are three who may be said to be the heads of their profession qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will begin my research by going round and finding if each of them is at his post qzmSEPqzm. 
 if one is missingespecially if he has disappeared since last nightwe will have some indication as to where the document has gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  why should he be missing asked the european secretary qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would take the letter to an embassy in london  as likely as not qzmSEPqzm. 
  i fancy not qzmSEPqzm. 
 these agents work independently  and their relations with the embassies are often strained qzmSEPqzm. 
  the prime minister nodded his acquiescence qzmSEPqzm. 
  i believe you are right  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would take so valuable a prize to headquarters with his own hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 i think that your course of action is an excellent one qzmSEPqzm. 
 meanwhile  hope  we cannot neglect all our other duties on account of this one misfortune qzmSEPqzm. 
 should there be any fresh developments during the day we shall communicate with you  and you will no doubt let us know the results of your own inquiries qzmSEPqzm. 
  the two statesmen bowed and walked gravely from the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  when our illustrious visitors had departed holmes lit his pipe in silence  and sat for some time lost in the deepest thought qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had opened the morning paper and was immersed in a sensational crime which had occurred in london the night before  when my friend gave an exclamation  sprang to his feet  and laid his pipe down upon the mantelpiece qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  said he  there is no better way of approaching it qzmSEPqzm. 
 the situation is desperate  but not hopeless qzmSEPqzm. 
 even now  if we could be sure which of them has taken it  it is just possible that it has not yet passed out of his hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 after all  it is a question of money with these fellows  and i have the british treasury behind me qzmSEPqzm. 
 if its on the market ill buy itif it means another penny on the incometax qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is conceivable that the fellow might hold it back to see what bids come from this side before he tries his luck on the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are only those three capable of playing so bold a game  there are oberstein  la rothiere  and eduardo lucas qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will see each of them qzmSEPqzm. 
  i glanced at my morning paper qzmSEPqzm. 
  is that eduardo lucas of godolphin street  yes qzmSEPqzm. 
  you will not see him qzmSEPqzm. 
  why not  he was murdered in his house last night qzmSEPqzm. 
  my friend has so often astonished me in the course of our adventures that it was with a sense of exultation that i realized how completely i had astonished him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he stared in amazement  and then snatched the paper from my hands qzmSEPqzm. 
 this was the paragraph which i had been engaged in reading when he rose from his chair                       murder in westminster qzmSEPqzm. 
  a crime of mysterious character was committed last night at  qzmNUMqzm   godolphin street  one of the oldfashioned and secluded rows of eighteenthcentury houses which lie between the river and the abbey  almost in the shadow of the great tower of the houses of parliament qzmSEPqzm. 
 this small but select mansion has been inhabited for some years by mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 eduardo lucas  well known in society circles both on account of his charming personality and because he has the welldeserved reputation of being one of the best amateur tenors in the country qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 lucas is an unmarried man  thirtyfour years of age  and his establishment consists of mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 pringle  an elderly housekeeper  and of mitton  his valet qzmSEPqzm. 
 the former retires early and sleeps at the top of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 the valet was out for the evening  visiting a friend at hammersmith qzmSEPqzm. 
 from ten oclock onwards mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 lucas had the house to himself qzmSEPqzm. 
 what occurred during that time has not yet transpired  but at a quarter to twelve policeconstable barrett  passing along godolphin street  observed that the door of no qzmSEPqzm. 
  qzmNUMqzm  was ajar qzmSEPqzm. 
 he knocked  but received no answer qzmSEPqzm. 
 perceiving a light in the front room he advanced into the passage and again knocked  but without reply qzmSEPqzm. 
 he then pushed open the door and entered qzmSEPqzm. 
 the room was in a state of wild disorder  the furniture being all swept to one side  and one chair lying on its back in the centre qzmSEPqzm. 
 beside this chair  and still grasping one of its legs  lay the unfortunate tenant of the house qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had been stabbed to the heart and must have died instantly qzmSEPqzm. 
 the knife with which the crime had been committed was a curved indian dagger  plucked down from a trophy of oriental arms which adorned one of the walls qzmSEPqzm. 
 robbery does not appear to have been the motive of the crime  for there had been no attempt to remove the valuable contents of the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 eduardo lucas was so well known and popular that his violent and mysterious fate will arouse painful interest and intense sympathy in a widespread circle of friends qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  watson  what do you make of this asked holmes  after a long pause qzmSEPqzm. 
  it is an amazing coincidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  a coincidence here is one of the three men whom we had named as possible actors in this drama  and he meets a violent death during the very hours when we know that that drama was being enacted qzmSEPqzm. 
 the odds are enormous against its being coincidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 no figures could express them qzmSEPqzm. 
 no  my dear watson  the two events are connectedmust be connected qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is for us to find the connection qzmSEPqzm. 
  but now the official police must know all qzmSEPqzm. 
  not at all qzmSEPqzm. 
 they know all they see at godolphin street qzmSEPqzm. 
 they knowand shall knownothing of whitehall terrace qzmSEPqzm. 
 only we know of both events  and can trace the relation between them qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is one obvious point which would  in any case  have turned my suspicions against lucas qzmSEPqzm. 
 godolphin street  westminster  is only a few minutes walk from whitehall terrace qzmSEPqzm. 
 the other secret agents whom i have named live in the extreme westend qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was easier  therefore  for lucas than for the others to establish a connection or receive a message from the european secretarys householda small thing  and yet where events are compressed into a few hours it may prove essential qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa what have we here  mrs qzmSEPqzm. 
 hudson had appeared with a ladys card upon her salver qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes glanced at it  raised his eyebrows  and handed it over to me qzmSEPqzm. 
  ask lady hilda trelawney hope if she will be kind enough to step up   said he qzmSEPqzm. 
  a moment later our modest apartment  already so distinguished that morning  was further honoured by the entrance of the most lovely woman in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had often heard of the beauty of the youngest daughter of the duke of belminster  but no description of it  and no contemplation of colourless photographs  had prepared me for the subtle  delicate charm and the beautiful colouring of that exquisite head qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet as we saw it that autumn morning  it was not its beauty which would be the first thing to impress the observer qzmSEPqzm. 
 the cheek was lovely  but it was paled with emotion  the eyes were bright  but it was the brightness of fever  the sensitive mouth was tight and drawn in an effort after selfcommand qzmSEPqzm. 
 terrornot beautywas what sprang first to the eye as our fair visitor stood framed for an instant in the open door qzmSEPqzm. 
  has my husband been here  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  yes  madam  he has been here qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i implore you not to tell him that i came here qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes bowed coldly  and motioned the lady to a chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  your ladyship places me in a very delicate position qzmSEPqzm. 
 i beg that you will sit down and tell me what you desire  but i fear that i cannot make any unconditional promise qzmSEPqzm. 
  she swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the window qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was a queenly presencetall  graceful  and intensely womanly qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  she said  and her whitegloved hands clasped and unclasped as she spokei will speak frankly to you in the hope that it may induce you to speak frankly in return qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is complete confidence between my husband and me on all matters save one qzmSEPqzm. 
 that one is politics qzmSEPqzm. 
 on this his lips are sealed qzmSEPqzm. 
 he tells me nothing qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  i am aware that there was a most deplorable occurrence in our house last night qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know that a paper has disappeared qzmSEPqzm. 
 but because the matter is political my husband refuses to take me into his complete confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 now it is essentialessential  i saythat i should thoroughly understand it qzmSEPqzm. 
 you are the only other person  save only these politicians  who knows the true facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 i beg you  then  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  to tell me exactly what has happened and what it will lead to qzmSEPqzm. 
 tell me all  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 let no regard for your clients interests keep you silent  for i assure you that his interests  if he would only see it  would be best served by taking me into his complete confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
 what was this paper which was stolen  madam  what you ask me is really impossible qzmSEPqzm. 
  she groaned and sank her face in her hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  you must see that this is so  madam qzmSEPqzm. 
 if your husband thinks fit to keep you in the dark over this matter  is it for me  who has only learned the true facts under the pledge of professional secrecy  to tell what he has withheld it is not fair to ask it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is him whom you must ask qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have asked him qzmSEPqzm. 
 i come to you as a last resource qzmSEPqzm. 
 but without your telling me anything definite  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you may do a great service if you would enlighten me on one point qzmSEPqzm. 
  what is it  madam  is my husbands political career likely to suffer through this incident  well  madam  unless it is set right it may certainly have a very unfortunate effect qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah she drew in her breath sharply as one whose doubts are resolved qzmSEPqzm. 
  one more question  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 from an expression which my husband dropped in the first shock of this disaster i understood that terrible public consequences might arise from the loss of this document qzmSEPqzm. 
  if he said so  i certainly cannot deny it qzmSEPqzm. 
  of what nature are they  nay  madam  there again you ask me more than i can possibly answer qzmSEPqzm. 
  then i will take up no more of your time qzmSEPqzm. 
 i cannot blame you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  for having refused to speak more freely  and you on your side will not  i am sure  think the worse of me because i desire  even against his will  to share my husbands anxieties qzmSEPqzm. 
 once more i beg that you will say nothing of my visit qzmSEPqzm. 
 she looked back at us from the door  and i had a last impression of that beautiful haunted face  the startled eyes  and the drawn mouth qzmSEPqzm. 
 then she was gone qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  watson  the fair sex is your department  said holmes  with a smile  when the dwindling froufrou of skirts had ended in the slam of the front door qzmSEPqzm. 
 what was the fair ladys game what did she really want  surely her own statement is clear and her anxiety very natural qzmSEPqzm. 
  hum think of her appearance  watsonher manner  her suppressed excitement  her restlessness  her tenacity in asking questions qzmSEPqzm. 
 remember that she comes of a caste who do not lightly show emotion qzmSEPqzm. 
  she was certainly much moved qzmSEPqzm. 
  remember also the curious earnestness with which she assured us that it was best for her husband that she should know all qzmSEPqzm. 
 what did she mean by that and you must have observed  watson  how she manoeuvred to have the light at her back qzmSEPqzm. 
 she did not wish us to read her expression qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  she chose the one chair in the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  and yet the motives of women are so inscrutable qzmSEPqzm. 
 you remember the woman at margate whom i suspected for the same reason qzmSEPqzm. 
 no powder on her nosethat proved to be the correct solution qzmSEPqzm. 
 how can you build on such a quicksand their most trivial action may mean volumes  or their most extraordinary conduct may depend upon a hairpin or a curlingtongs qzmSEPqzm. 
 good morning  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are off  yes  i will wile away the morning at godolphin street with our friends of the regular establishment qzmSEPqzm. 
 with eduardo lucas lies the solution of our problem  though i must admit that i have not an inkling as to what form it may take qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is a capital mistake to theorize in advance of the facts qzmSEPqzm. 
 do you stay on guard  my good watson  and receive any fresh visitors qzmSEPqzm. 
 ill join you at lunch if i am able qzmSEPqzm. 
   all that day and the next and the next holmes was in a mood which his friends would call taciturn  and others morose qzmSEPqzm. 
 he ran out and ran in  smoked incessantly  played snatches on his violin  sank into reveries  devoured sandwiches at irregular hours  and hardly answered the casual questions which i put to him qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was evident to me that things were not going well with him or his quest qzmSEPqzm. 
 he would say nothing of the case  and it was from the papers that i learned the particulars of the inquest  and the arrest with the subsequent release of john mitton  the valet of the deceased qzmSEPqzm. 
 the coroners jury brought in the obvious wilful murder   but the parties remained as unknown as ever qzmSEPqzm. 
 no motive was suggested qzmSEPqzm. 
 the room was full of articles of value  but none had been taken qzmSEPqzm. 
 the dead mans papers had not been tampered with qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were carefully examined  and showed that he was a keen student of international politics  an indefatigable gossip  a remarkable linguist  and an untiring letterwriter qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had been on intimate terms with the leading politicians of several countries qzmSEPqzm. 
 but nothing sensational was discovered among the documents which filled his drawers qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to his relations with women  they appeared to have been promiscuous but superficial qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had many acquaintances among them  but few friends  and no one whom he loved qzmSEPqzm. 
 his habits were regular  his conduct inoffensive qzmSEPqzm. 
 his death was an absolute mystery  and likely to remain so qzmSEPqzm. 
  as to the arrest of john mitton  the valet  it was a counsel of despair as an alternative to absolute inaction qzmSEPqzm. 
 but no case could be sustained against him qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had visited friends in hammersmith that night qzmSEPqzm. 
 the alibi was complete qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is true that he started home at an hour which should have brought him to westminster before the time when the crime was discovered  but his own explanation that he had walked part of the way seemed probable enough in view of the fineness of the night qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had actually arrived at twelve oclock  and appeared to be overwhelmed by the unexpected tragedy qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had always been on good terms with his master qzmSEPqzm. 
 several of the dead mans possessionsnotably a small case of razorshad been found in the valets boxes  but he explained that they had been presents from the deceased  and the housekeeper was able to corroborate the story qzmSEPqzm. 
 mitton had been in lucass employment for three years qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was noticeable that lucas did not take mitton on the continent with him qzmSEPqzm. 
 sometimes he visited paris for three months on end  but mitton was left in charge of the godolphin street house qzmSEPqzm. 
 as to the housekeeper  she had heard nothing on the night of the crime qzmSEPqzm. 
 if her master had a visitor he had himself admitted him qzmSEPqzm. 
  so for three mornings the mystery remained  so far as i could follow it in the papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 if holmes knew more he kept his own counsel  but  as he told me that inspector lestrade had taken him into his confidence in the case  i knew that he was in close touch with every development qzmSEPqzm. 
 upon the fourth day there appeared a long telegram from paris which seemed to solve the whole question qzmSEPqzm. 
  a discovery has just been made by the parisian police  said the daily telegraph  which raises the veil which hung round the tragic fate of mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 eduardo lucas  who met his death by violence last monday night at godolphin street  westminster qzmSEPqzm. 
 our readers will remember that the deceased gentleman was found stabbed in his room  and that some suspicion attached to his valet  but that the case broke down on an alibi qzmSEPqzm. 
 yesterday a lady  who has been known as mme qzmSEPqzm. 
 henri fournaye  occupying a small villa in the rue austerlitz  was reported to the authorities by her servants as being insane qzmSEPqzm. 
 an examination showed that she had indeed developed mania of a dangerous and permanent form qzmSEPqzm. 
 on inquiry the police have discovered that mme qzmSEPqzm. 
 henri fournaye only returned from a journey to london on tuesday last  and there is evidence to connect her with the crime at westminster qzmSEPqzm. 
 a comparison of photographs has proved conclusively that m qzmSEPqzm. 
 henri fournaye and eduardo lucas were really one and the same person  and that the deceased had for some reason lived a double life in london and paris qzmSEPqzm. 
 mme qzmSEPqzm. 
 fournaye  who is of creole origin  is of an extremely excitable nature  and has suffered in the past from attacks of jealousy which have amounted to frenzy qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is conjectured that it was in one of these that she committed the terrible crime which has caused such a sensation in london qzmSEPqzm. 
 her movements upon the monday night have not yet been traced  but it is undoubted that a woman answering to her description attracted much attention at charing cross station on tuesday morning by the wildness of her appearance and the violence of her gestures qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is probable  therefore  that the crime was either committed when insane  or that its immediate effect was to drive the unhappy woman out of her mind qzmSEPqzm. 
 at present she is unable to give any coherent account of the past  and the doctors hold out no hopes of the reestablishment of her reason qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is evidence that a woman  who might have been mme qzmSEPqzm. 
 fournaye  was seen for some hours on monday night watching the house in godolphin street qzmSEPqzm. 
  what do you think of that  holmes i had read the account aloud to him  while he finished his breakfast qzmSEPqzm. 
  my dear watson  said he  as he rose from the table and paced up and down the room  you are most longsuffering  but if i have told you nothing in the last three days it is because there is nothing to tell qzmSEPqzm. 
 even now this report from paris does not help us much qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely it is final as regards the mans death qzmSEPqzm. 
  the mans death is a mere incidenta trivial episodein comparison with our real task  which is to trace this document and save a european catastrophe qzmSEPqzm. 
 only one important thing has happened in the last three days  and that is that nothing has happened qzmSEPqzm. 
 i get reports almost hourly from the government  and it is certain that nowhere in europe is there any sign of trouble qzmSEPqzm. 
 now  if this letter were looseno  it cant be loosebut if it isnt loose  where can it be who has it why is it held back thats the question that beats in my brain like a hammer qzmSEPqzm. 
 was it  indeed  a coincidence that lucas should meet his death on the night when the letter disappeared did the letter ever reach him if so  why is it not among his papers did this mad wife of his carry it off with her if so  is it in her house in paris how could i search for it without the french police having their suspicions aroused it is a case  my dear watson  where the law is as dangerous to us as the criminals are qzmSEPqzm. 
 every mans hand is against us  and yet the interests at stake are colossal qzmSEPqzm. 
 should i bring it to a successful conclusion it will certainly represent the crowning glory of my career qzmSEPqzm. 
 ah  here is my latest from the front he glanced hurriedly at the note which had been handed in qzmSEPqzm. 
 halloa lestrade seems to have observed something of interest qzmSEPqzm. 
 put on your hat  watson  and we will stroll down together to westminster qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was my first visit to the scene of the crimea high  dingy  narrowchested house  prim  formal  and solid  like the century which gave it birth qzmSEPqzm. 
 lestrades bulldog features gazed out at us from the front window  and he greeted us warmly when a big constable had opened the door and let us in qzmSEPqzm. 
 the room into which we were shown was that in which the crime had been committed  but no trace of it now remained  save an ugly  irregular stain upon the carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
 this carpet was a small square drugget in the centre of the room  surrounded by a broad expanse of beautiful  oldfashioned woodflooring in square blocks highly polished qzmSEPqzm. 
 over the fireplace was a magnificent trophy of weapons  one of which had been used on that tragic night qzmSEPqzm. 
 in the window was a sumptuous writingdesk  and every detail of the apartment  the pictures  the rugs  and the hangings  all pointed to a taste which was luxurious to the verge of effeminacy qzmSEPqzm. 
  seen the paris news asked lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes nodded qzmSEPqzm. 
  our french friends seem to have touched the spot this time qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt its just as they say qzmSEPqzm. 
 she knocked at the doorsurprise visit  i guess  for he kept his life in watertight compartments qzmSEPqzm. 
 he let her incouldnt keep her in the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 she told him how she had traced him  reproached him  one thing led to another  and then with that dagger so handy the end soon came qzmSEPqzm. 
 it wasnt all done in an instant  though  for these chairs were all swept over yonder  and he had one in his hand as if he had tried to hold her off with it qzmSEPqzm. 
 weve got it all clear as if we had seen it qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes raised his eyebrows qzmSEPqzm. 
  and yet you have sent for me  ah  yes  thats another mattera mere trifle  but the sort of thing you take an interest inqueer  you know  and what you might call freakish qzmSEPqzm. 
 it has nothing to do with the main factcant have  on the face of it qzmSEPqzm. 
  what is it  then  well  you know  after a crime of this sort we are very careful to keep things in their position qzmSEPqzm. 
 nothing has been moved qzmSEPqzm. 
 officer in charge here day and night qzmSEPqzm. 
 this morning  as the man was buried and the investigation overso far as this room is concernedwe thought we could tidy up a bit qzmSEPqzm. 
 this carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see  it is not fastened down  only just laid there qzmSEPqzm. 
 we had occasion to raise it qzmSEPqzm. 
 we found  yes you found  holmess face grew tense with anxiety qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  im sure you would never guess in a hundred years what we did find qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see that stain on the carpet well  a great deal must have soaked through  must it not  undoubtedly it must qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  you will be surprised to hear that there is no stain on the white woodwork to correspond qzmSEPqzm. 
  no stain but there must  yes  so you would say qzmSEPqzm. 
 but the fact remains that there isnt qzmSEPqzm. 
  he took the corner of the carpet in his hand and  turning it over  he showed that it was indeed as he said qzmSEPqzm. 
  but the underside is as stained as the upper qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must have left a mark qzmSEPqzm. 
  lestrade chuckled with delight at having puzzled the famous expert qzmSEPqzm. 
  now ill show you the explanation qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is a second stain  but it does not correspond with the other qzmSEPqzm. 
 see for yourself qzmSEPqzm. 
 as he spoke he turned over another portion of the carpet  and there  sure enough  was a great crimson spill upon the square white facing of the oldfashioned floor qzmSEPqzm. 
 what do you make of that  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  why  it is simple enough qzmSEPqzm. 
 the two stains did correspond  but the carpet has been turned round qzmSEPqzm. 
 as it was square and unfastened it was easily done qzmSEPqzm. 
  the official police dont need you  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  to tell them that the carpet must have been turned round qzmSEPqzm. 
 thats clear enough  for the stains lie above each otherif you lay it over this way qzmSEPqzm. 
 but what i want to know is  who shifted the carpet  and why  i could see from holmess rigid face that he was vibrating with inward excitement qzmSEPqzm. 
  look here  lestrade  said he  has that constable in the passage been in charge of the place all the time  yes  he has qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  take my advice qzmSEPqzm. 
 examine him carefully qzmSEPqzm. 
 dont do it before us qzmSEPqzm. 
 well wait here qzmSEPqzm. 
 you take him into the back room qzmSEPqzm. 
 youll be more likely to get a confession out of him alone qzmSEPqzm. 
 ask him how he dared to admit people and leave them alone in this room qzmSEPqzm. 
 dont ask him if he has done it qzmSEPqzm. 
 take it for granted qzmSEPqzm. 
 tell him you know someone has been here qzmSEPqzm. 
 press him qzmSEPqzm. 
 tell him that a full confession is his only chance of forgiveness qzmSEPqzm. 
 do exactly what i tell you  by george  if he knows ill have it out of him cried lestrade qzmSEPqzm. 
 he darted into the hall  and a few moments later his bullying voice sounded from the back room qzmSEPqzm. 
  now  watson  now cried holmes  with frenzied eagerness qzmSEPqzm. 
 all the demoniacal force of the man masked behind that listless manner burst out in a paroxysm of energy qzmSEPqzm. 
 he tore the drugget from the floor  and in an instant was down on his hands and knees clawing at each of the squares of wood beneath it qzmSEPqzm. 
 one turned sideways as he dug his nails into the edge of it qzmSEPqzm. 
 it hinged back like the lid of a box qzmSEPqzm. 
 a small black cavity opened beneath it qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes plunged his eager hand into it  and drew it out with a bitter snarl of anger and disappointment qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was empty qzmSEPqzm. 
  quick  watson  quick get it back again the wooden lid was replaced  and the drugget had only just been drawn straight when lestrades voice was heard in the passage qzmSEPqzm. 
 he found holmes leaning languidly against the mantelpiece  resigned and patient  endeavouring to conceal his irrepressible yawns qzmSEPqzm. 
  sorry to keep you waiting  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i can see that you are bored to death with the whole affair qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  he has confessed  all right qzmSEPqzm. 
 come in here  macpherson qzmSEPqzm. 
 let these gentlemen hear of your most inexcusable conduct qzmSEPqzm. 
  the big constable  very hot and penitent  sidled into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  i meant no harm  sir  im sure qzmSEPqzm. 
 the young woman came to the door last eveningmistook the house  she did qzmSEPqzm. 
 and then we got talking qzmSEPqzm. 
 its lonesome  when youre on duty here all day qzmSEPqzm. 
  well  what happened then  she wanted to see where the crime was donehad read about it in the papers  she said qzmSEPqzm. 
 she was a very respectable  wellspoken young woman  sir  and i saw no harm in letting her have a peep qzmSEPqzm. 
 when she saw that mark on the carpet  down she dropped on the floor  and lay as if she were dead qzmSEPqzm. 
 i ran to the back and got some water  but i could not bring her to qzmSEPqzm. 
 then i went round the corner to the ivy plant for some brandy  and by the time i had brought it back the young woman had recovered and was offashamed of herself  i dare say  and dared not face me qzmSEPqzm. 
  how about moving that drugget  well  sir  it was a bit rumpled  certainly  when i came back qzmSEPqzm. 
 you see  she fell on it  and it lies on a polished floor with nothing to keep it in place qzmSEPqzm. 
 i straightened it out afterwards qzmSEPqzm. 
  its a lesson to you that you cant deceive me  constable macpherson   said lestrade  with dignity qzmSEPqzm. 
 no doubt you thought that your breach of duty could never be discovered  and yet a mere glance at that drugget was enough to convince me that someone had been admitted to the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 its lucky for you  my man  that nothing is missing  or you would find yourself in queer street qzmSEPqzm. 
 im sorry to have called you down over such a petty business  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  but i thought the point of the second stain not corresponding with the first would interest you qzmSEPqzm. 
  certainly  it was most interesting qzmSEPqzm. 
 has this woman only been here once  constable  yes  sir  only once qzmSEPqzm. 
  who was she  dont know the name  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
 was answering an advertisement about typewriting  and came to the wrong numbervery pleasant  genteel young woman  sir qzmSEPqzm. 
  tall handsome  yes  sir  she was a wellgrown young woman qzmSEPqzm. 
 i suppose you might say she was handsome qzmSEPqzm. 
 perhaps some would say she was very handsome qzmSEPqzm. 
 oh  officer  do let me have a peep says she qzmSEPqzm. 
 she had pretty  coaxing ways  as you might say  and i thought there was no harm in letting her just put her head through the door qzmSEPqzm. 
  how was she dressed  quiet  sira long mantle down to her feet qzmSEPqzm. 
  what time was it  it was just growing dusk at the time qzmSEPqzm. 
 they were lighting the lamps as i came back with the brandy qzmSEPqzm. 
  very good  said holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  watson  i think that we have more important work elsewhere qzmSEPqzm. 
  as we left the house lestrade remained in the front room  while the repentant constable opened the door to let us out qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes turned on the step and held up something in his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
 the constable stared intently qzmSEPqzm. 
  good lord  sir he cried  with amazement on his face qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes put his finger on his lips  replaced his hand in his breastpocket  and burst out laughing as we turned down the street qzmSEPqzm. 
 excellent said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 come  friend watson  the curtain rings up for the last act qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will be relieved to hear that there will be no war  that the right honourable trelawney hope will suffer no setback in his brilliant career  that the indiscreet sovereign will receive no punishment for his indiscretion  that the prime minister will have no european complication to deal with  and that with a little tact and management upon our part nobody will be a penny the worse for what might have been a very ugly incident qzmSEPqzm. 
  my mind filled with admiration for this extraordinary man qzmSEPqzm. 
  you have solved it i cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  hardly that  watson qzmSEPqzm. 
 there are some points which are as dark as ever qzmSEPqzm. 
 but we have so much that it will be our own fault if we cannot get the rest qzmSEPqzm. 
 we will go straight to whitehall terrace and bring the matter to a head qzmSEPqzm. 
  when we arrived at the residence of the european secretary it was for lady hilda trelawney hope that sherlock holmes inquired qzmSEPqzm. 
 we were shown into the morningroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes said the lady  and her face was pink with her indignation  this is surely most unfair and ungenerous upon your part qzmSEPqzm. 
 i desired  as i have explained  to keep my visit to you a secret  lest my husband should think that i was intruding into his affairs qzmSEPqzm. 
 and yet you compromise me by coming here and so showing that there are business relations between us qzmSEPqzm. 
  unfortunately  madam  i had no possible alternative qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have been commissioned to recover this immensely important paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 i must therefore ask you  madam  to be kind enough to place it in my hands qzmSEPqzm. 
  the lady sprang to her feet  with the colour all dashed in an instant from her beautiful face qzmSEPqzm. 
 her eyes glazedshe totteredi thought that she would faint qzmSEPqzm. 
 then with a grand effort she rallied from the shock  and a supreme astonishment and indignation chased every other expression from her features qzmSEPqzm. 
  youyou insult me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  come  madam  it is useless qzmSEPqzm. 
 give up the letter qzmSEPqzm. 
  she darted to the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
  the butler shall show you out qzmSEPqzm. 
  do not ring  lady hilda qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you do  then all my earnest efforts to avoid a scandal will be frustrated qzmSEPqzm. 
 give up the letter and all will be set right qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you will work with me i can arrange everything qzmSEPqzm. 
 if you work against me i must expose you qzmSEPqzm. 
  she stood grandly defiant  a queenly figure  her eyes fixed upon his as if she would read his very soul qzmSEPqzm. 
 her hand was on the bell  but she had forborne to ring it qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are trying to frighten me qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is not a very manly thing  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  to come here and browbeat a woman qzmSEPqzm. 
 you say that you know something qzmSEPqzm. 
 what is it that you know  pray sit down  madam qzmSEPqzm. 
 you will hurt yourself there if you fall qzmSEPqzm. 
 i will not speak until you sit down qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank you qzmSEPqzm. 
  i give you five minutes  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
  one is enough  lady hilda qzmSEPqzm. 
 i know of your visit to eduardo lucas  of your giving him this document  of your ingenious return to the room last night  and of the manner in which you took the letter from the hidingplace under the carpet qzmSEPqzm. 
  she stared at him with an ashen face and gulped twice before she could speak qzmSEPqzm. 
  you are mad  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmesyou are mad she cried  at last qzmSEPqzm. 
  he drew a small piece of cardboard from his pocket qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was the face of a woman cut out of a portrait qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have carried this because i thought it might be useful  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 the policeman has recognised it qzmSEPqzm. 
  she gave a gasp and her head dropped back in the chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  lady hilda qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have the letter qzmSEPqzm. 
 the matter may still be adjusted qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have no desire to bring trouble to you qzmSEPqzm. 
 my duty ends when i have returned the lost letter to your husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 take my advice and be frank with me  it is your only chance qzmSEPqzm. 
  her courage was admirable qzmSEPqzm. 
 even now she would not own defeat qzmSEPqzm. 
  i tell you again  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  that you are under some absurd illusion qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes rose from his chair qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am sorry for you  lady hilda qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have done my best for you  i can see that it is all in vain qzmSEPqzm. 
  he rang the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
 the butler entered qzmSEPqzm. 
  is mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 trelawney hope at home  he will be home  sir  at a quarter to one qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes glanced at his watch qzmSEPqzm. 
  still a quarter of an hour  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 very good  i shall wait qzmSEPqzm. 
  the butler had hardly closed the door behind him when lady hilda was down on her knees at holmess feet  her hands outstretched  her beautiful face upturned and wet with her tears qzmSEPqzm. 
  oh  spare me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes spare me she pleaded  in a frenzy of supplication qzmSEPqzm. 
 for heavens sake  dont tell him i love him so i would not bring one shadow on his life  and this i know would break his noble heart qzmSEPqzm. 
  holmes raised the lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am thankful  madam  that you have come to your senses even at this last moment there is not an instant to lose qzmSEPqzm. 
 where is the letter  she darted across to a writingdesk  unlocked it  and drew out a long blue envelope qzmSEPqzm. 
  here it is  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 would to heaven i had never seen it  how can we return it holmes muttered qzmSEPqzm. 
 quick  quick  we must think of some way where is the despatchbox  still in his bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  what a stroke of luck quick  madam  bring it here  a moment later she had appeared with a red flat box in her hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  how did you open it before you have a duplicate key yes  of course you have qzmSEPqzm. 
 open it  from out of her bosom lady hilda had drawn a small key qzmSEPqzm. 
 the box flew open qzmSEPqzm. 
 it was stuffed with papers qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes thrust the blue envelope deep down into the heart of them  between the leaves of some other document qzmSEPqzm. 
 the box was shut  locked  and returned to the bedroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  now we are ready for him  said holmes  we have still ten minutes qzmSEPqzm. 
 i am going far to screen you  lady hilda qzmSEPqzm. 
 in return you will spend the time in telling me frankly the real meaning of this extraordinary affair qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i will tell you everything  cried the lady qzmSEPqzm. 
 oh  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i would cut off my right hand before i gave him a moment of sorrow there is no woman in all london who loves her husband as i do  and yet if he knew how i have actedhow i have been compelled to acthe would never forgive me qzmSEPqzm. 
 for his own honour stands so high that he could not forget or pardon a lapse in another qzmSEPqzm. 
 help me  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes my happiness  his happiness  our very lives are at stake  quick  madam  the time grows short  it was a letter of mine  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  an indiscreet letter written before my marriagea foolish letter  a letter of an impulsive  loving girl qzmSEPqzm. 
 i meant no harm  and yet he would have thought it criminal qzmSEPqzm. 
 had he read that letter his confidence would have been for ever destroyed qzmSEPqzm. 
 it is years since i wrote it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i had thought that the whole matter was forgotten qzmSEPqzm. 
 then at last i heard from this man  lucas  that it had passed into his hands  and that he would lay it before my husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 i implored his mercy qzmSEPqzm. 
 he said that he would return my letter if i would bring him a certain document which he described in my husbands despatchbox qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had some spy in the office who had told him of its existence qzmSEPqzm. 
 he assured me that no harm could come to my husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 put yourself in my position  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes what was i to do  take your husband into your confidence qzmSEPqzm. 
  i could not  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  i could not on the one side seemed certain ruin  on the other  terrible as it seemed to take my husbands paper  still in a matter of politics i could not understand the consequences  while in a matter of love and trust they were only too clear to me qzmSEPqzm. 
 i did it  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes i took an impression of his key  this man lucas furnished a duplicate qzmSEPqzm. 
 i opened his despatchbox  took the paper  and conveyed it to godolphin street qzmSEPqzm. 
  what happened there  madam  i tapped at the door as agreed qzmSEPqzm. 
 lucas opened it qzmSEPqzm. 
 i followed him into his room  leaving the hall door ajar behind me  for i feared to be alone with the man qzmSEPqzm. 
 i remember that there was a woman outside as i entered qzmSEPqzm. 
 our business was soon done qzmSEPqzm. 
 he had my letter on his desk  i handed him the document qzmSEPqzm. 
 he gave me the letter qzmSEPqzm. 
 at this instant there was a sound at the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 there were steps in the passage qzmSEPqzm. 
 lucas quickly turned back the drugget  thrust the document into some hidingplace there  and covered it over qzmSEPqzm. 
  what happened after that is like some fearful dream qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have a vision of a dark  frantic face  of a womans voice  which screamed in french  my waiting is not in vain qzmSEPqzm. 
 at last  at last i have found you with her there was a savage struggle qzmSEPqzm. 
 i saw him with a chair in his hand  a knife gleamed in hers qzmSEPqzm. 
 i rushed from the horrible scene  ran from the house  and only next morning in the paper did i learn the dreadful result qzmSEPqzm. 
 that night i was happy  for i had my letter  and i had not seen yet what the future would bring qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was the next morning that i realized that i had only exchanged one trouble for another qzmSEPqzm. 
 my husbands anguish at the loss of his paper went to my heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 i could hardly prevent myself from there and then kneeling down at his feet and telling him what i had done qzmSEPqzm. 
 but that again would mean a confession of the past qzmSEPqzm. 
 i came to you that morning in order to understand the full enormity of my offence qzmSEPqzm. 
 from the instant that i grasped it my whole mind was turned to the one thought of getting back my husbands paper qzmSEPqzm. 
 it must still be where lucas had placed it  for it was concealed before this dreadful woman entered the room qzmSEPqzm. 
 if it had not been for her coming  i should not have known where his hidingplace was qzmSEPqzm. 
 how was i to get into the room for two days i watched the place  but the door was never left open qzmSEPqzm. 
 last night i made a last attempt qzmSEPqzm. 
 what i did and how i succeeded  you have already learned qzmSEPqzm. 
 i brought the paper back with me  and thought of destroying it since i could see no way of returning it  without confessing my guilt to my husband qzmSEPqzm. 
 heavens  i hear his step upon the stair  the european secretary burst excitedly into the room qzmSEPqzm. 
  any news  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  any news he cried qzmSEPqzm. 
  i have some hopes qzmSEPqzm. 
  ah  thank heaven his face became radiant qzmSEPqzm. 
 the prime minister is lunching with me qzmSEPqzm. 
 may he share your hopes he has nerves of steel  and yet i know that he has hardly slept since this terrible event qzmSEPqzm. 
 jacobs  will you ask the prime minister to come up as to you  dear  i fear that this is a matter of politics qzmSEPqzm. 
 we will join you in a few minutes in the diningroom qzmSEPqzm. 
  the prime ministers manner was subdued  but i could see by the gleam of his eyes and the twitchings of his bony hands that he shared the excitement of his young colleague qzmSEPqzm. 
  i understand that you have something to report  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  purely negative as yet  my friend answered qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have inquired at every point where it might be  and i am sure that there is no danger to be apprehended qzmSEPqzm. 
  but that is not enough  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes qzmSEPqzm. 
 we cannot live for ever on such a volcano qzmSEPqzm. 
 we must have something definite qzmSEPqzm. 
  i am in hopes of getting it qzmSEPqzm. 
 that is why i am here qzmSEPqzm. 
 the more i think of the matter the more convinced i am that the letter has never left this house qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  if it had it would certainly have been public by now qzmSEPqzm. 
  but why should anyone take it in order to keep it in his house  i am not convinced that anyone did take it qzmSEPqzm. 
  then how could it leave the despatchbox  i am not convinced that it ever did leave the despatchbox qzmSEPqzm. 
  mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  this joking is very illtimed qzmSEPqzm. 
 you have my assurance that it left the box qzmSEPqzm. 
  have you examined the box since tuesday morning  no  it was not necessary qzmSEPqzm. 
  you may conceivably have overlooked it qzmSEPqzm. 
  impossible  i say qzmSEPqzm. 
  but i am not convinced of it  i have known such things to happen qzmSEPqzm. 
 i presume there are other papers there qzmSEPqzm. 
 well  it may have got mixed with them qzmSEPqzm. 
  it was on the top qzmSEPqzm. 
  someone may have shaken the box and displaced it qzmSEPqzm. 
  no  no  i had everything out qzmSEPqzm. 
  surely it is easily decided  hope  said the premier qzmSEPqzm. 
 let us have the despatchbox brought in qzmSEPqzm. 
  the secretary rang the bell qzmSEPqzm. 
  jacobs  bring down my despatchbox qzmSEPqzm. 
 this is a farcical waste of time  but still  if nothing else will satisfy you  it shall be done qzmSEPqzm. 
 thank you  jacobs  put it here qzmSEPqzm. 
 i have always had the key on my watchchain qzmSEPqzm. 
 here are the papers  you see qzmSEPqzm. 
 letter from lord merrow  report from sir charles hardy  memorandum from belgrade  note on the russogerman grain taxes  letter from madrid  note from lord flowersgood heavens what is this lord bellinger lord bellinger  the premier snatched the blue envelope from his hand qzmSEPqzm. 
  yes  it is itand the letter is intact qzmSEPqzm. 
 hope  i congratulate you qzmSEPqzm. 
  thank you thank you what a weight from my heart qzmSEPqzm. 
 but this is inconceivableimpossible qzmSEPqzm. 
 mr qzmSEPqzm. 
 holmes  you are a wizard  a sorcerer how did you know it was there  because i knew it was nowhere else qzmSEPqzm. 
  i cannot believe my eyes he ran wildly to the door qzmSEPqzm. 
 where is my wife i must tell her that all is well qzmSEPqzm. 
 hilda hilda we heard his voice on the stairs qzmSEPqzm. 
  the premier looked at holmes with twinkling eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  come  sir  said he qzmSEPqzm. 
 there is more in this than meets the eye qzmSEPqzm. 
 how came the letter back in the box  holmes turned away smiling from the keen scrutiny of those wonderful eyes qzmSEPqzm. 
  we also have our diplomatic secrets  said he  and picking up his hat he turned to the door qzmSEPqzm. 
        
